docs: tss ledger id platform design proposal (#13747)
hashgraph/hedera-services: platform-sdk/docs/proposals/TSS-Ledger-Id/TSS-Ledger-Id.md

- Development of the TSS-Ledger-ID proposal is dependent on TSS-Roster proposal in the following ways:
  - The `Roster` data structures must be defined and stored in state.
  - To modify the roster adoption lifecycle with TSS conditions, the TSS-Roster life-cycle must be implemented.

Impacts of TSS-Ledger-ID to Services Team

- The timing of submitting the candidate roster may need to be adjusted to allow enough time for the candidate
  roster to have key material generated.
- Services will need to know or detect when the candidate roster fails to be adopted due to not having enough key
  material generated.
- More than half and preferably all the nodes' public `tssEncryptionKeys` will need to be added to the address book.
  - This requires modification of the HAPI transactions that manage the address book.

Impacts to DevOps Team

- Each consensus node will need a new `tssEncryptionKey` in addition to the existing RSA key.
  - EC Key generation will have to happen before a node can join the network.
- A new node added to an existing network will need to be given a state from an existing node after the network has

>   adopted the address book containing the new node.

Author: If it is a completely new node and it is joining an existing network, then it must be given a state where the active roster in the state contains the new node.   From here, reconnect can catch the node up to peer with the existing nodes.  I'm pretty sure that the node will not start if it is given a state where the node is not in the active roster.

>   adopted the address book containing the new node.

Author: I am taking your first point

  has received enough yes votes.

Implications Of Completion

- The network will have a public ledger id that can verify ledger signatures.
- The active consensus nodes can transfer the ability to sign messages to the next set of consensus nodes.
- `TSS-Block-Signing` and `TSS-Ledger-ID-Updates` proposals becomes unblocked for development.

### Requirements

TSS Core Requirements

| Requirement ID |                                                        Requirement Description                                                        |
|----------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| TSS-001        | The ledger MUST have a public/private signing key pair that does not change when the consensus roster changes.                        |
| TSS-002        | The ledger private key MUST be a secret that nobody knows.                                                                            |
| TSS-003        | The `ledger id` MUST be a public key that everyone knows and able to verify signatures from the ledger private key.                   |

> | TSS-004        | The ledger signature MUST be produced through aggregating signatures from consensus nodes representing at least 1/3 consensus weight. |

Author: I am not adopting this change due to this being a mathematic requirement and not a configuration setting.

   `active roster` and remain the candidate roster. The platform will continue to attempt to key the candidate
   roster after software upgrade.
4. The app must detect whether or not the `candidate roster` became the `active roster`.

![TSS Roster Lifecycle](./TSS-Roster-Lifecycle.drawio.svg)

#### TSS Algorithm

The threshold signature scheme chosen for our implementation is detailed in [Non-interactive distributed key
generation and key resharing (Groth21)](https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/339). This scheme is able to meet the
core requirements listed above. The rest of this proposal details the design of how to implement this scheme in the
consensus nodes. See the TSS-Library proposal for more details on the Groth21.

The Groth21 algorithm uses [Shamir Secret Sharing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shamir%27s_secret_sharing) to hide the
private key of the ledger and distribute shares of it so that a threshold number of node signatures on a message can
generate the ledger signature on the same message. The threshold should be high enough to ensure at least 1 honest
share is required to participate in the signing since a threshold number of shares can also collude to recover the

> ledger private key, if they so choose.

Author: I am rejecting the language change because this is a security related behavior.  We need the threshold high enough that we require honest node participation to prevent malicious nodes from being able to collude.

  all your shares have wps of 1/2, and all the ones you don't collect have a wps of 1. Which means you'll have 1/2 the
  shares.
- Conversely, if you want to collect more than 2/3 the weight while holding as few shares as possible, that happens when
  you collect only shares with wps of 1, and all the rest are 1/2. And again, that means you have more than 1/2 the
  shares.
- So both theorems are proved.

###### Impacts on Service's Calculation of Weight from Staked HBars

The services layer will track staking to nodes, clipping any stake above the max, and reducing any stake below `1/R` of
the maximum clipped stake to zero (where `R` is a setting of services, set to twice the max number of shares allowed per
node).

The resulting stake (after clipping or zeroing) is passed to the platform layer, which treats it as a “weight” for
consensus, and which then generates a number of shares for each node. That share count is proportional to that weight,
and acts as a low-resolution version of that weight.

##### TSS Algorithm - Alternatives Considered

The list of options considered here were based off of prototypes developed by [Rohit Sinha](https://github.com/rsinha),

> the Hashgraph cryptography expert. The Groth21 algorithm was chosen because it was efficient for use in smart

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the Hashgraph cryptography expert. The Groth21 algorithm was chosen because it is efficient for use in smart
```

> contract verification, and we could assign a multiplicity of shares to nodes to get close enough in modeling the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
contract verification, and we can assign a multiplicity of shares to nodes to get close enough in modeling the
```

distribution of weight between nodes.

| Requirement | hinTS | Groth21 |
|-------------|-------|---------|
| TSS-001     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-002     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-003     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-004     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-005     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-006     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-007     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-008     | No    | Yes     |
| TSS-009     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-010     | Yes   | No      |

###### hinTS

The hinTS algorithm is a threshold signature scheme that is able to measure double precision distributions of weight
across nodes. The complicating factor with hinTS is that during an address book change over, a recursive proof needs
to be constructed to prove that the new roster is a descendent of the original genesis roster. Validation of this

> recursive proof proved too expensive for EVM smart contracts, even with EC curve precompiles.

Reviewer: This says elliptic curve curve due to using just initials:
```suggestion
recursive proof proved too expensive for EVM smart contracts, even with elliptic curve precompiles.
```

#### TSS Bootstrap Process

The TSS bootstrap process is the process of generating the ledger public/private key pair for a new network or an
existing network. There are several options to consider in the TSS bootstrap process:

1. Do we allow block number and round number to be out of sync?
2. Do we need the initial block produced to be signed by the ledger id?
3. For new networks, do we need to produce a signed block 1?
4. For existing networks, does the TSS bootstrap roster sign blocks prior to its existence?

##### For New Networks

There will be a pre-genesis phase where the genesis roster is keyed and a random ledger id is created. This will
happen through running the platform without application transactions. After the platform keys the roster, the

> platform restarts itself with a copy of the genesis state and adding to it the TSS key material and ledger

Reviewer: ```suggestion
platform restarts itself with a copy of the genesis state after adding the TSS key material and ledger id
```

id. After the platform restarts, application transactions are accepted and the platform starts building a new
hashgraph, working towards consensus on round 1 with the ability to sign block 1. This ensures that the first user

> transactions handled by the network are in a block that can have a block proof soon as possible. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
transactions handled by the network are in a block that can have a block proof as soon as possible. The
```

| 6 | Retrospectively sign the initial blocks with TSS once it becomes available.                                   | <span style="color:green">YES</span> | <span style="color:green">YES</span>                 | <span style="color:green">YES</span> | <span style="color:green">YES</span> | <span style="color:green">YES</span> | <span style="color:green">YES</span> | <span style="color:green">YES</span> | <span style="color:red">HIGH</span>       | TSS Genesis Roster signs older blocks.  This is compatible with all other options. |
| 7 | Pre-Genesis: Separate app with genesis roster creates key material in state before network officially starts. | <span style="color:green">YES</span> | <span style="color:green">YES</span>                 | <span style="color:green">YES</span> | <span style="color:green">YES</span> | <span style="color:red">NO</span>    | <span style="color:red">NO</span>    | <span style="color:red">NO</span>    | <span style="color:red">HIGH</span>       | Applies to new networks only.  Use Option 1 or 2 for existing networks.            |

> | 8 | Instead of separate app, detect genesis, key the state, restart the network with a keyed genesis state.       | <span style="color:green">YES</span> | <span style="color:green">YES</span>                 | <span style="color:green">YES</span> | <span style="color:green">YES</span> | <span style="color:red">NO</span>    | <span style="color:red">NO</span>    | <span style="color:green">YES</span> | <span style="color:red">HIGH</span>       | Applies to new networks only.  Use Option 1 or 2 for existing networks.            |

Reviewer: Just a note, all of the style information here is stripped out by most markdown processors (including github).

Author: that is unfortunate.

Option 2 was chosen for existing networks and Option 8 was selected for new networks. This decision was made to

> ensure that the first block in the block stream is can be signed by the ledger.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ensure that the first block in the block stream can be signed by the ledger.
```

---

## Changes

The changes are presented in the following order:

1. Public API
2. Core Behaviors
3. Component Architecture
4. Configuration
5. Metrics
6. Performance

### Public API

The public API changes consist of the following:

- System Transactions
- State Data Structures

#### System Transactions

The following are new system transactions needed to key rosters and generate ledger signatures:

1. `TssMessageTransaction` - Used to send a TssMessage to the network for a candidate roster.
2. `TssVoteTransaction` - Used to vote on the validity of TssMessages for a candidate roster.

##### TssMessage System Transaction

```protobuf
/**
 * The TssMessageTransaction is used to send a TssMessage to the network for a candidate roster.
 */
message TssMessageTransaction {

  /**

>    * The node id is the id of the node that generated the TssMessage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * An identifier for the node that generated the TssMessage.
```

   */
  uint64 node_id = 1;

  /**

>    * The source roster hash is the hash of the roster containing the node generating the TssMessage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * A hash of the roster containing the node generating the TssMessage.
```

   */
  bytes source_roster_hash = 2;

  /**

>    * The target roster hash is the hash of the roster that the TssMessage is for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * A hash of the roster that the TssMessage is for.
```

   */
  bytes target_roster_hash = 3;

  /**

>    * The share index establishes a global ordering of shares across all shares in the network.  It corresponds to the
>    * index of the public share in the list returned from the TSS library when the share was created for the source
>    * roster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * An index to order shares.<br/>
   * This establishes a global ordering of shares across all shares in
   * the network.  It corresponds to the index of the public share in the
   * list returned from the TSS library when the share was created for
   * the source roster.
```

   */
  uint64 share_index = 4;

  /**

>    * The tss_message is the raw bytes of the TssMessage generated by the node for the share_index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * A byte array containing the the TssMessage generated by the node
   * for the share_index.
```

   */
  bytes tss_message = 5;

  /**

>    * The signature is produced by the node signing the tuple (source_roster_hash, target_roster_hash, share_index,
>    * tss_message) using its private `tssEncryptionKey`.  The signature is verified by other nodes using the public
>    * key of the `tssEncryptionKey` of the node sending this transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * A signature is produced by the node.<br/>
   * This is created by signing the tuple (source_roster_hash, target_roster_hash,
   * share_index, tss_message) using the node's private `tssEncryptionKey`.
   * The signature is verified by other nodes using the public key of the
   * `tssEncryptionKey` for the node sending this transaction.
```

   */
  bytes signature = 6;
}
```

##### TssVote System Transaction

```protobuf
/**

>  * The TssVoteTransaction is used to vote on the validity of TssMessages for a candidate roster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * A transaction used to vote on the validity of TssMessages for a candidate roster.
```

 */
message TssVoteTransaction {

  /**

>    * The node id is the id of the node that generated the TssVote.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * An identifier for the node that generated this TssVote.
```

   */
  uint64 node_id = 1;

  /**

>    * The source roster hash is the hash of the roster containing the node generating the TssVote.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * A hash of the roster containing the node generating this TssVote.
```

   */
  bytes source_roster_hash = 2;

  /**

>    * The target roster hash is the hash of the roster that the TssVote is for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * A hash of the roster that this TssVote is for.
```

   */
  bytes target_roster_hash = 3;

  /**

>    * The ledger id that was computed from the TssMessages for the target roster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * An identifier (and public key) computed from the TssMessages for the target roster.
```

   */
  bytes ledger_id = 4;

  /**

>    * The signature produced by the node using its RSA signing key to sign the ledger_id.  This signature is used to
>    * establish a chain of trust in the ledger id.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * A signature produced by the node.<br/>
   * This is produced using the node RSA signing key to sign the ledger_id.
   * This signature is used to establish a chain of trust in the ledger id.
```

   */
  bytes node_signature = 5;

  /**

>    * The tss_vote is a bit vector where the index position of each bit corresponds to the sequence number of a
>    * `TssMessageTransaction`. The least significant bit of byte[0] corresponds to sequence number 0 and the most
>    * significant bit of byte[0] corresponds to sequence number 7.  The least significant bit of byte[1] corresponds to
>    * sequence number 8 and the most significant bit of byte[1] corresponds to the sequence number 15, and so on.
>    * If a bit is set to 1, then the TssMessage for the corresponding TssMessageTransaction sequence number was
>    * received as one of the first Threshold number of valid TssMessages in consensus order.  If a bit is set to 0,
>    * then the TssMessage was invalid or there was no TssMessageTransaction with a sequence number corresponding to
>    * the bit index.

Reviewer: Two items here:
1. The indentation should be 4 spaces, not 2 for all protobufs.
1. This particular description is exceptionally detailed; it _may_ be a bit
   more than is needed.
```suggestion
    /**
     * A bit vector where the index position of each bit corresponds to the
     * sequence number of a `TssMessageTransaction`. The least significant bit
     * of byte[0] corresponds to sequence number 0 and the most significant bit
     * of byte[0] corresponds to sequence number 7.  The least significant bit
     * of byte[1] corresponds to sequence number 8 and the most significant bit
     * of byte[1] corresponds to the sequence number 15, and so on. If a bit is
     * set to 1, then the TssMessage for the corresponding TssMessageTransaction
     * sequence number was received as one of the first Threshold number of
     * valid TssMessages in consensus order.  If a bit is set to 0, then the
     * TssMessage was invalid or there was no TssMessageTransaction with a
     * sequence number corresponding to the bit index.
     */
```

   */
  bytes tss_vote = 5;

>   /**
>    * The signature is produced by the node signing the tuple (source_roster_hash, target_roster_hash, ledger_id,
>    * node_signature, tss_vote) using its private `tssEncryptionKey`.  The signature is verified by other nodes using
>    * the public key of the `tssEncryptionKey` of the node sending this transaction.
>    */

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /**
     * A signature produced by the node signing the tuple
     * (source_roster_hash, target_roster_hash, ledger_id, node_signature, tss_vote)
     * using its private `tssEncryptionKey`.
     * The signature is verified by other nodes using the public key of the
     * `tssEncryptionKey` for the node sending this transaction.
     */
```

  has received enough yes votes.

Implications Of Completion

- The network will have a public ledger id that can verify ledger signatures.
- The active consensus nodes can transfer the ability to sign messages to the next set of consensus nodes.
- `TSS-Block-Signing` and `TSS-Ledger-ID-Updates` proposals becomes unblocked for development.

### Requirements

TSS Core Requirements

| Requirement ID |                                                        Requirement Description                                                        |
|----------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| TSS-001        | The ledger MUST have a public/private signing key pair that does not change when the consensus roster changes.                        |
| TSS-002        | The ledger private key MUST be a secret that nobody knows.                                                                            |
| TSS-003        | The `ledger id` MUST be a public key that everyone knows and that is able to verify signatures from the ledger private key.           |

> | TSS-004        | The ledger signature MUST be produced through aggregating signatures from consensus nodes representing at least 1/3 consensus weight. |

Reviewer 2: I understand the logic (assuming 2/3+1 nodes by stake weight are honest, if at least 1/3 of signatures are collected by stake weight, then we must have included at least 1 honest node). However, there are ramifications to this instead of 2/3.

I was talking with Oleg today about a way to determine dynamic network throttling. We may have a very nice way to do this, if we used 2/3 as the requirement for signing. It would mean that any given node could look at the number of rounds produced by its hashgraph that are newer than the most recent signed block/round and determine how many rounds the entire network is behind. This could be used as a deterministic measure by which the network as a whole could throttle back.

If signing works for 1/3 instead of 2/3, then this dynamic throttle idea may not work. I'm not sure at this moment what to make of it, other than, maybe we should go with 2/3 for now and adjust to 1/3 in the future if we find we can?

Reviewer 2: For now, ignore this suggestion. Let's keep it as defined in this document and consider the throttling problem separately.

Author: Later on in the design doc there is a theorem that requires 1/2 shares to sign for a security guarantee in the down sampling from stake to weight to shares.

```protobuf
/**
 * A public key that identifies the ledger and can be used to verify ledger signatures.
 */
message LedgerId {

  /**
   * A public key.<br/>
   * This key both identifies the ledger and can be used to verify ledger signatures.
   * <p>
   * This value MUST be set.<br/>
   * This value MUST NOT be empty.<br/>
   * This value MUST contain a valid public key.
   */
  bytes ledger_id = 1;

  /**
   * A round number.<br/>
   * This identifies when this ledger id becomes active.
   * <p>
   * This value is REQUIRED.
   */
  uint64 round = 2;

  /**
   * A signature from the prior ledger key.<br/>
   * This signature is the _previous_ ledger ID signing _this_ ledger ID.
   * <p>
   * This value MAY be unset, if there is no prior ledger ID.<br/>
   * This value SHOULD be set if a prior ledger ID exists
   * to generate the signature.
   */
  bytes ledger_signature = 3;

  /**
   * A map of node RSA signatures.
   * This is a map from node ids to the _RSA_ node signatures on the ledger id.
   * <p>
   * This value MUST be present when the ledger signature of a previous ledger id is absent.
   */

>   map<uint64, bytes> node_signatures = 4;

Reviewer: Yes, protobuf maps are deliberately randomized in some protobuf implementations (to preserve performance optimization options, according to the [protobuf documentation](https://protobuf.dev/programming-guides/serialization-not-canonical/#things-intentionally-left-undefined)), so they cannot be deterministic.

>   map<uint64, bytes> node_signatures = 4;

Author: I am adding a new message type to turn this into a list.

1. Inserts should only be made for candidate rosters that are going through the keying process.
2. When a roster is no longer stored in the state, the corresponding key material and votes should be removed.
3. Every roster that has become active after the TSS bootstrap process must have sufficient key material to be
   able to recover the ledger id.

### Core Behaviors

We will add new behavior related to the bootstrap process of creating the ledger id
and transferring the ability to sign messages from one roster to the next roster

#### Startup for New Networks

At the start of a new network there will be a new pre-genesis phase to generate the key material for the genesis
roster and then restart the network, after adding the new key material and ledger id
to the genesis state.

The following startup sequence on new networks is modified from existing practices.

1. The app will read the genesis address book and initial cryptography from disk
2. The app will generate a genesis state and genesis roster.
3. The app will ensure that it does not accept user transactions.
4. The app will start the platform with the above and key the genesis roster with the TSS key material.

> 5. After the genesis roster is keyed, the app will adopt the ledger id and restart the platform with the key

Reviewer 3: There are a few changes for app here. Start and restart platform. Have these been discussed with services team?

Reviewer 2: I think this _is_ that discussion 😄

Reviewer 3: I missed that discussion. Thanks!

>       material, the node will add the key material and ledger id to a copy of the genesis state and restart the

Author: modifying it locally.

3. If a software upgrade is detected,
   1. If the existing active roster and candidate roster do not have complete
      key material and the network does not yet have a ledger id, the node will
      adopt the candidate roster immediately on software upgrade.
      - This will retain the pre-ledger-id behavior of the network until the
        ledger id can be created for the first time.
   2. If the candidate roster exists, has key material, and the number of yes
      votes passes the threshold for adoption, then the candidate roster
      will be adopted and become the new active roster.
      1. Validation Check: if the state already has a ledger id set, the ledger
         id recovered from the key material must match the ledger id
         in the state.
      2. If there is no ledger id in the state and the previously active roster
         has no key material, the ledger id recovered from the candidate roster
         key material will be set in the state as the new ledger id.
   3. In all other cases the existing active roster will remain the
      active roster.
4. The application will provide the platform with the active roster to use.

> 5. The platform will continue through its normal startup sequence.

Reviewer 3: Is only during upgrade, a candidate roster can become an active roster?

Reviewer 2: At the moment, yes. Once we have dynamic address book phase 3, the update will be triggered by the first transaction after midnight.

TSS related state and computation. In this proposal, the capability is scoped to keying the candidate rosters to
generate a ledger id and transfer it from one roster to the next. In the `TSS-Block-Signing` proposal, the
capability will be expanded to signing messages with share private keys and aggregating the signatures to create a
ledger signature from the network.

The TSS Base Service will be broken out into one interface and two components.

1. `TssService` - the interface that defines the public API for the TSS Base Service.
2. `TssStateManager` - executes on the transaction handling thread and updates state.
3. `TssCryptographyManager` - executes on a separate thread and is responsible for cryptographic operations.
4. Transaction Resubmission

![TSS Platform Wiring](./TSS-Wiring-Diagram.drawio.svg)

#### TssService

```java

/**
 * The TssService will attempt to generate TSS key material for any set candidate roster, giving it a ledger id and
 * the ability to generate ledger signatures that can be verified by the ledger id.  Once the candidate roster has
 * received its full TSS key material, it will be made available for adoption by the platform.
 */

> public interface TssService {

Reviewer 2: Do we also need an API for signing? Once the TSS Service has all the appropriate keys and is asked to sign, should it have an API to do so?

Reviewer 4: I believe the signing API will be a part of a separate, future `TSS-Block-Signing` proposal mentioned here a few times.

   - If the previous candidate roster has been replaced, use its saved roster hash to clear the
     roster map of the old candidate roster and clear the `TssMessageMap` and `TssVoteMap` of
     entries related to the roster hash.

#### TSS Message Creator

The TSS message creator is responsible for generating a node’s TSSMessages for its shares. This runs as its own
asynchronous thread since this may be a computationally expensive operation.

Internal Elements:

1. active roster hash
2. candidate roster hash
3. Map<RosterHash, Roster> rosters
4. Map<RosterHash, List<PairingPrivateKey>> privateShares
5. NodeId (constructor)
6. TssEncryptionKey (constructor)

Inputs:

1. Active Roster (Wire)
2. Candidate Roster (Wire)
3. private shares (Wire)

`On Active Roster`:

1. If the new active roster is the same as the existing one, do nothing.
2. If the new active roster == the candidate roster,
   1. clear the candidate roster hash.
   2. clear the maps of the previous active roster data.
3. If there existed a previous active roster and the candidate roster is different from the new active roster, log an
   error.
4. Set the new active roster

> 5. If the active roster has private shares set, and there exists a candidate roster,

Reviewer 5: Why would TssMessageTransactions be created an there is a new active roster? I think this should only be done when there is a new candidate roster.

   then `createTssMessageTransactions`.

`On Candidate Roster`:

1. If the internal candidate roster is set and equal to the input candidate roster, do nothing.
2. Otherwise, set the internal candidate roster.
3. If the active roster has private shares set, and there exists a candidate roster,
   then `createTssMessageTransactions`.

`On Private Shares`:

1. Record the private shares in the internal private shares map for the appropriate roster hash.

> 2. If the active roster has private shares set, and there exists a candidate roster,

Reviewer 5: Same comment here, not sure this is right.

- The process of transferring the ability of the ledger to sign a message from one set of consensus nodes to another.
- The new state data structures needed to store TSS Key material and the ledger id.
- The new components needed in the framework to support creating and transferring the ledger key.
- The modified startup process to initialize the signing capability.
- For each node, the creation of a new, private to the node, Elliptic Curve (EC)
  key pair, which we call the `tssEncryptionKey`, that is used in creating and
  decrypting shares.

### Goals

The following capabilities are goals of this proposal:

1. `TSS Bootstrap on Existing Network` - Able to setup an existing network with a ledger public/private key pair.
2. `Keying The Next Roster` - Able to transfer the ability to sign a message with the ledger private key from one
   set of consensus nodes to another.
3. `TSS Bootstrap in Test Networks` - Able to setup a test network with a ledger public/private key pair without
   restart.
4. Testing of the TSS signing capability with verification by an EVM smart contract using the ALT_BN128

>    [precompiles that are available in the EVM](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1829.md).

Author: I was editing the proposal anyway, let me know if this is any clearer.

private key of the ledger and distribute shares of it so that a threshold number of node signatures on a message can
generate the ledger signature on the same message. The threshold should be high enough to ensure at least 1 honest
share is required to participate in the signing since a threshold number of shares can also collude to recover the
ledger private key, if they so choose.

The Groth21 algorithm requires a specific class of Elliptic Curve (EC) with the ability to produce bilinear pairings.
Each node will need its own long-term EC key pair, called a `tssEncryptionKey`, based on the chosen curve, for use
in the Groth21 TSS algorithm. Each node receives some number of shares in proportion to the consensus weight
assigned to it. Each share is an EC key pair on the same curve. All public keys of the shares are known, and
aggregating a threshold number of share public keys will produce the ledger id. Each node only has access to the
private key of its own shares, and none other. Each node must keep their private keys secret because a threshold
number of share private keys can aggregate to recover the ledger private key. A threshold number of signatures

> on the same message from the shar private keys will aggregate to produce a ledger signature on the message.

Author: I will update in the next version.

     * using its private `tssEncryptionKey`.
     * The signature is verified by other nodes using the public key of the
     * `tssEncryptionKey` for the node sending this transaction.
     */
  bytes signature = 6;
}
```

#### State Datastructures

The state needs to store the relevant ledger id and TSS Data (key material and votes).

##### Ledger Id Queue

The `ledgerId` is the public ledger key able to verify ledger signatures. It is used by the platform and other
entities outside the consensus node. This value should not change during normal address book changes and its value does
not change unless the network goes through another TSS bootstrap process. When the value changes, to transfer trust,
the old ledger private key should sign the new ledger id or the nodes should sign the new ledger id with their RSA
signing keys, or both. Quads of (ledger id, round, ledger signature, map<nodeid, node_signature>) are stored in a
list in a singleton to record the history of ledger ids on the network.

NOTE: The detailed processes for updating the ledger id can be found in the `TSS-Ledger-ID-Updates` proposal.

```protobuf
/**

>  * The LedgerId is the public key of the ledger that can verify ledger signatures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * A public key that identifies the ledger and can be used to verify ledger signatures.
```

##### The Cleanup Release

This release will contain any code cleanup required from the migration to the new TSS bootstrap process.

### Component Architecture

A new Service called `TSS Base Service` is introduced to the application layer. This service is responsible for all
TSS related state and computation. In this proposal, the capability is scoped to keying the candidate rosters to
generate a ledger id and transfer it from one roster to the next. In the `TSS-Block-Signing` proposal, the
capability will be expanded to signing messages with share private keys and aggregating the signatures to create a
ledger signature from the network.

The TSS Base Service will be broken out into one interface and two components.

1. `TssService` - the interface that defines the public API for the TSS Base Service.
2. `TssStateManager` - executes on the transaction handling thread and updates state.
3. `TssCryptographyManager` - executes on a separate thread and is responsible for cryptographic operations.
4. Transaction Resubmission

![TSS Platform Wiring](./TSS-Wiring-Diagram.drawio.svg)

#### TssService

> The `TssService` interface provides the inter-service API for the TSS Base Service. It is responsible for setting the

Reviewer 6: Just noting that there will be a name overlap with:
https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/blob/develop/hedera-cryptography/hedera-cryptography-tss/src/main/java/com/hedera/cryptography/tss/api/TssService.java

Author: I can modify it to `TssBaseService` which is consistent with the naming that @rbair23 was using.

   - if the previous candidate roster has been replaced, use its saved roster hash to clear the roster map of the
     old candidate roster and clear the `TssMessageMap` and `TssVoteMap` of entries related to the roster hash.

#### TSS Message Creator

The TSS message creator is responsible for generating a node’s TSSMessages for its shares. This runs as its own
asynchronous thread since this may be a computationally expensive operation.

Internal Elements:

1. active roster hash
2. candidate roster hash
3. Map<RosterHash, Roster> rosters
4. Map<RosterHash, List<PairingPrivateKey>> privateShares
5. NodeId (constructor)
6. TssEncryptionKey (constructor)

Inputs:

1. Active Roster (Wire)
2. Candidate Roster (Wire)
3. private shares (Wire)

`On Active Roster`:

1. If the new active roster is the same as the existing one, do nothing.
2. If the new active roster == the candidate roster,
   1. clear the candidate roster hash.
   2. clear the maps of the previous active roster data.
3. If there existed a previous active roster and the candidate roster is different from the new active roster, log an
   error.
4. Set the new active roster

> 5. If the active roster has private shares set and there exists a candidate roster, then `createTssMessageTransactions`.

Reviewer: Missing comma:
```suggestion
5. If the active roster has private shares set, and there exists a candidate roster, then `createTssMessageTransactions`.
```

`On Candidate Roster`:

1. If the internal candidate roster is set and equal to the input candidate roster, do nothing.

> 2. else, set the internal candidate roster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Otherwise, set the internal candidate roster.
```

> 3. If the active roster has private shares set and there exists a candidate roster, then `createTssMessageTransactions`.

Reviewer: Missing comma:
```suggestion
3. If the active roster has private shares set, and there exists a candidate roster, then `createTssMessageTransactions`.
```

`On Private Shares`:

> 1. record the private shares in the internal private shares map for the appropriate roster hash.
> 2. If the active roster has private shares set and there exists a candidate roster, then `createTssMessageTransactions`.

Reviewer: Capitalization and punctuation:
```suggestion
1. Record the private shares in the internal private shares map for the appropriate roster hash.
2. If the active roster has private shares set, and there exists a candidate roster, then `createTssMessageTransactions`.
```

`createTssMessageTransactions`:

1. For each private share belonging to the active roster:
   1. Use the TSS-Library to generate a TSS Message for the share private key and public keys for the candidate roster.

>    2. submit a system `TssMessageTransaction` with the TSS Message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   2. Submit a system `TssMessageTransaction` with the TSS Message.
```

#### TSS Message Validator

The TSS message validator is responsible for validating TSS messages and for submitting votes as to the validity of the
candidate roster. The TSS message validator gets its input from the TSS state manager in the form of a candidate roster
that we want to adopt, and as a sequence of TSS messages that have reached consensus.

Internal Elements:

1. active roster hash
2. candidate roster hash
3. Map<RosterHash, Roster> rosters
4. Map<RosterHash, List<TssMessageTransaction>> tssMessages
5. Map<RosterHash, List<TssVoteTransaction>> tssVotes
6. Set<RosterHash> votingClosed
7. private RSA signing key (constructor argument)

Inputs:

1. Active Roster (Wire)
2. Candidate Roster (Wire)
3. TssMessageTransaction (Wire)
4. TssVoteTransaction (Wire)
5. Public Shares and Ledger ID (Wire)

Input Invariants

1. TSS Messages for the candidate roster must be received after the candidate roster is set.
2. TSS Votes for the candidate roster must be received after the candidate roster is set.
3. A TSS Message must exist if a TSS Vote has a 1 in the vote vector for the corresponding share index.

`On Active Roster`:

> 1. If the new active roster is the same as the existing one, do nothing.
> 2. If the new active roster == the candidate roster
>    1. clear the candidate roster hash
>    2. clear the map data for the previous active roster.
>    3. remove the previous active roster hash from the voting closed set.
> 3. If a previous active roster existed and the candidate roster is different from the new active roster, log an error.
> 4. Set the new active roster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If the new active roster is the same as the existing one, do nothing.
2. If the new active roster == the candidate roster.
   1. Clear the candidate roster hash.
   2. Clear the map data for the previous active roster.
   3. Remove the previous active roster hash from the voting closed set.
3. If a previous active roster existed and the candidate roster is different from the new active roster, log an error.
4. Set the new active roster.
```

`On Candidate Roster`:

> 1. If the input candidate roster is equal to the active roster, do nothing.
> 2. If the input candidate roster is equal to the internal candidate roster, do nothing.
> 3. Set the internal candidate roster.
> 4. If a previous candidate roster existed
>    1. clear the associated `TssMessageTransaction` and `TssVoteTransaction` data.
>    2. remove the previous candidate roster hash from the voting closed set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If the input candidate roster is equal to the active roster, do nothing.
2. If the input candidate roster is equal to the internal candidate roster, do nothing.
3. Set the internal candidate roster.
4. If a previous candidate roster existed.
   1. Clear the associated `TssMessageTransaction` and `TssVoteTransaction` data.
   2. Remove the previous candidate roster hash from the voting closed set.
```

`On TssMessageTransaction`:

1. If the voting is closed, do nothing.
2. If a `TssVoteTransaction` exists for this node, do nothing.
3. If a TSS Message already exists for the share index and target roster, do nothing.
4. Validate the TssMessage and if valid, add it to the list of TssMessageTransactions for the target roster.
5. Update the sequence number bit in the vote vector with the results of validation for the TssMessageTransaction.
6. If there are (active roster) threshold number of valid TssMessageTransactions for the target roster, send
   the valid TssMessageTransactions transcript to the TSS Key Manager

`On TssVoteTransaction`:

1. If voting is closed or the vote is a duplicate of an existing vote, do nothing.
2. Add the vote to the total and check if the threshold is met.
3. If the threshold is met, add the roster hash to the voting closed set.

`On PublicSharesAndLedgerId`:

1. If the public shares and ledger id are for the candidate roster,
   1. Sign the ledger ID with the node's private signing key.

>    2. send a `TssVoteTransaction` with the ledger id and the vote vector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   2. Send a `TssVoteTransaction` with the ledger id and the vote vector.
```

##### Validate TSS Message List

> 1. For the votes already cast in the vote vector
>    1. sum all the yes votes into a total count.
>    2. If the count is greater than or equal to the threshold in the candidate roster, do nothing and return.
> 2. For each TSS message in the TSS Message list
>    1. If the TSS Message has a yes entry in the vote vector, do nothing.
>    2. otherwise, validate the message.
>    3. If the message is valid, update the vote vector and increment the count of yes votes.
>    4. If the count of yes votes is greater than or equal to the threshold in the candidate roster, then send the
>       vote vector as a system transaction and exit the validation process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. For the votes already cast in the vote vector.
   1. Sum all the yes votes into a total count.
   2. If the count is greater than or equal to the threshold in the candidate roster, do nothing and return.
2. For each TSS message in the TSS Message list.
   1. If the TSS Message has a yes entry in the vote vector, do nothing.
   2. Otherwise, validate the message.
   3. If the message is valid, update the vote vector and increment the count of yes votes.
   4. If the count of yes votes is greater than or equal to the threshold in the candidate roster, then send the
      vote vector as a system transaction and exit the validation process.
```

#### TSS Key Manager

The TSS Key Manager is responsible for generating the public and private keys of the shares for a fully keyed roster.
It receives on input the bundle of TssMessages that generate share keys and produces on output the private shares
for the node, the public shares, and the ledger id.

Internal Elements:

1. Map<RosterHash, Roster> rosters
2. Map<RosterHash, List<TssMessage>> tssMessages
3. Map<RosterHash, Record(RosterHash, List<PairingPrivateKey>, List<PairingPublicKey>, LedgerId)> shares

Inputs:

1. Pair<RosterHash, Roster> (Wire)
2. Pair<RosterHash, List<TssMessage>> (Wire)

Outputs

1. Record(RosterHash, List<PairingPrivateKey>, List<PairingPublicKey>, LedgerId) (Wire)

#### Transaction Resubmitter

> The transaction resubmitter is extended to detect which the new `TssMessageTransaction` and `TssVoteTransaction`
> system transactions have not reached consensus because the event containing them has become stale. The Transaction
> Resubmitter will resubmit these transactions to the transaction pool for reprocessing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The transaction resubmitter is extended to detect which of the new `TssMessageTransaction` and `TssVoteTransaction`
system transactions have not reached consensus because the event containing them has become stale. The transaction
resubmitter will resubmit these transactions to the transaction pool for reprocessing.
```

### Configuration

The following are new configuration:

1. `tss.maxSharesPerNode` - The maximum number of shares that can be assigned to a node.

### Metrics

> The following metrics should be added to the platform:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following metrics will be added to the platform:
```

> 1. When a candidate roster is set.

Reviewer: Not sure about this one; the subject of the sentence was missing, so I've guessed as to what it should be.
```suggestion
1. The consensus time when a candidate roster is set.
```

2. The number of TSS Messages collected for a candidate roster.
3. The number of votes collected for a candidate roster.
4. The time it takes to compute shares from the key material.

### Performance

> The `TSS State Manager` execution on the transaction handling through routes TSS related system transactions to the
> relevant components and updates the TSS related data structures in the state. The routing should be a negligible
> impact provided the receiving components receive the messages and handles them on their own thread. The state
> updates should be simple crud operations, adds and deletes to data structures. All other computation on the
> transaction handling thread should be basic bookkeeping calculations and TSS signature verifications.

Reviewer: Slight wording fixes, capitalization and punctuation.
```suggestion
The `TSS State Manager` execution on the transaction handling thread routes TSS
related system transactions to the relevant components and updates the TSS
related data structures in the state. This routing should be a negligible
impact provided the receiving components receive the messages and handle them
on their own thread(s). The state updates should be simple "crud" operations,
to add, update, and delete from data structures. All other computation on the
transaction handling thread should be basic bookkeeping calculations
and TSS signature verifications.
```

> transaction handling thread should be basic bookkeeping calculations and TSS signature verifications.

Reviewer: Question: Can signature verification be handled on separate thread(s)?

Signature verification is one of the more expensive things we do, and there is a good amount of work already put into keeping it off the transaction handling thread when possible.

---

## Test Plan

### Unit Tests

Apart from the obvious unit testing of methods and classes, the following scenarios should be unit tested:

- Failure Scenarios
  - Bad TssMessages
  - Failure to reach threshold number of votes
- HAPI Tests
  - A down node during pre-genesis needing to get the key material from post-genesis node.
  - Down nodes during bootstrap and re-keying
  - Multi-release migrations

### Integration Tests

Additional Integration Tests:

- TSS bootstrap for New Networks
- TSS bootstrap for Existing Networks

>   - multiple software upgrades to check transfer of the ledger id.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Multiple software upgrades to check transfer of the ledger id.
```

- Network State Transplant

### Performance Tests

The following needs performance profiling:

1. How long does it take to generate the key material for a new candidate roster as a function of roster size?
2. How much space is being used in the state for all TSS related data structures?

---

## Implementation and Delivery Plan

### Implementation

> 1. The protobufs for the new system transactions and state data structures.

Reviewer: Might be worth calling out that this includes modifications to the BlockStream protobufs.

There should be a HIP for this proposal too, and all protobuf changes needed should be included in that HIP.

| TSS-011        | The TSS design SHOULD minimize the number of steps a Node Operator is required to perform.                                            |

Block Signing Requirements

| Requirement ID | Requirement Description                                                                     |
|----------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| TSSBS-001      | The initial block in the block stream SHOULD be signable and verifiable with the ledger id. |
| TSSBS-002      | On a new network, the initial block MUST be block 1                                         |

### Design Decisions

Since the consensus node does not depend on TSS capabilities, a new `TSS Base Service` will be created in the
application to manage state changes and startup behavior. The `TSS Base Service` will be responsible for:

1. Keying the candidate roster with the TSS key material.
2. On Startup: Determining whether to adopt the candidate roster as the active roster for the platform.

#### New Address Book Life-Cycle

Each day, on the first transaction after midnight, after the staking information has been updated by the app, it will

> generate a new roster and call a public API on `TSS Base Service`, which will then use this as the new candidate

Reviewer 3: Each day, we generate a new roster. We will have many new rosters before upgrade. The follow lines assume we only have one new roster before upgrade.

Author: It is the latest roster that will be adopted.   I am updating the wording for greater clarity.

| TSS-002     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-003     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-004     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-005     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-006     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-007     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-008     | No    | Yes     |
| TSS-009     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-010     | Yes   | No      |

###### hinTS

The hinTS algorithm is a threshold signature scheme that is able to measure double precision distributions of weight
across nodes. The complicating factor with hinTS is that during an address book change over, a recursive proof needs
to be constructed to prove that the new roster is a descendent of the original genesis roster. Validation of this
recursive proof proved too expensive for EVM smart contracts, even with elliptic curve precompiles.

#### TSS Bootstrap Process

The TSS bootstrap process is the process of generating the ledger public/private key pair for an
existing network. There are several options to consider in the TSS bootstrap process:

1. Do we allow block number and round number to be out of sync?
2. Do we need the initial block produced to be signed by the ledger id?
3. For new networks, do we need to produce a signed block 1?

> 4. For existing networks, does the TSS bootstrap roster sign blocks prior to its existence?

Reviewer 3: Are the answers to these questions depending on block steams?

Author: Yes.  I am updating this proposal with answers that have been determined so far.

> # Threshold Signature Scheme (TSS) Ledger ID

Reviewer 7: Calling this proposal `TSS Ledger Id` isn't super descriptive, as the ledger ID is only a tiny slice of what the proposal covers. What about `TSS Keying`? Or `TSS Key Distribution`?

Author: The naming was chosen more for the PM and business abstraction level.  This proposal delivers the `Ledger Id`.   The shares and logistics with keying are all in support of the existence and transfer of the `Ledger Id`.

| Designers          | Edward, Cody, Austin, Kore, Anthony, Artem |
| Functional Impacts | Services, DevOps                           |
| Related Proposals  | TSS-Library, TSS-Roster, TSS-Block-Signing |
| HIPS               | N/A                                        |

---

## Purpose and Context

Users of a ledger want to have cryptographic proofs that a statement was true on the ledger at a particular point in
time. Our chosen method for providing these types of proofs is to assign a permanent public/private key pair to the
ledger for use in signing blocks and constructing block proofs. The ledger private key must be a secret that no one
knows. The ledger public key is known by all and functions as the ledger id. While the ledger private key is unknown to
anyone, the consensus nodes must be able to aggregate their individual signatures on a message into a valid ledger
signature for the message that is verifiable by the public key.

The TSS effort has been broken down into four separate proposals: TSS-Library, TSS-Roster, TSS-Ledger-Id, and
TSS-Block-Signing.

1. The `TSS-Library` proposal contains the cryptographic primitives and algorithms needed to implement TSS.

> 2. The `TSS-Roster` proposal introduces the data structure of a consensus `Roster` to replace the platform's concept of

Reviewer 8: One point of this proposal that I do not understand is the consensus roster. Would it be possible to add a short paragraph describing what that is?

Author: I will leave that for the `TSS-Roster` proposal to be more descriptive since this proposal is dependent on it.

   an `AddressBook` and modifies the life-cycle for when the platform receives new consensus rosters.

> 3. The `TSS-Ledger-Id` proposal depends on the other first two proposals is for the integration of a threshold signature

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
3. This proposal (`TSS-Ledger-Id`) depends on the other first two proposals and is for the integration of a threshold signature
```

Author: updating locally to reflect your suggestion here.

|----------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| TSS-001        | The ledger MUST have a public/private signing key pair that does not change when the consensus roster changes.               |
| TSS-002        | The ledger private key MUST be a secret that nobody knows.                                                                   |
| TSS-003        | The `ledger id` MUST be a public key that everyone knows and able to verify signatures from the ledger private key.          |
| TSS-004        | The ledger signature for a message MUST be produced through a threshold number of consensus nodes signing the message.       |
| TSS-005        | There MUST be a way to bootstrap an existing network's consensus roster with to give the ledger a public/private signing key |
| TSS-006        | There MUST be a way for a new network to generate a public/private signing key for the ledger.                               |
| TSS-007        | There MUST be a way to rotate the ledger's public/private signing key.                                                       |

> | TSS-008        | The ledger signature SHOULD be verifiable by an EVM smart contract without excessive cost or time.                           |

Reviewer 8: I do not understand how the EVM and smart contracts fit into that topic. Later in the proposal you say

> Our first implementation of Groth21 will use the ALT_BN128 elliptic curve which is in use and verifiable by EVMs.

That is all I can find regarind EVM usage / smart contracts. Can you please add somewhere an information how and why it is used by the EVM.

| TSS-009        | The TSS implementation SHOULD be able to switch elliptic curves.                                                             |
| TSS-010        | The TSS algorithm SHOULD be able to model consensus weight with high precision.                                              |

### Design Decisions

#### New Address Book Life-Cycle

This design proposal will deliver after Dynamic Address Book  (DAB) Phase 2 and before DAB Phase 3. In Phase 2 the
address book is updated on software upgrades. In Phase 3 the address book is updated dynamically without restarting
the node. Since the TSS effort requires keying a roster with enough `TssMessages` to generate ledger signatures, a
modified life-cycle is needed. Some of the dynamic work in Phase 3 will be needed. This work is being encapsulated
in the TSS-Roster proposal, which will need to be completed before the TSS-Ledger-Id proposal can be fully implemented.

> The relevant Address Book life-cycle changes are the following:

Reviewer 8: After reading it 2 times, I still do not understand the life-cycle. The description is good; I assume it is just too complex. Would it be possible to add a graph/diagram?

Author: I am adding a diagram.   The `TSS-Roster` proposal will outline the structure of the roster.

1. The platform only receives a Roster, a subset of the Address Book.
2. The application address book has 3 states: `Active` (AAB), `Candidate` (CAB), and `Future` (FAB).

> 3. The FAB is updated by every HAPI transaction that is already received in DAB Phase 2.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
3. The FAB is updated by every HAPI transaction that is already received in Dynamic Address Book Phase 2.
```
I had a AcronymsOutOfBoundsException :D

Author: changed

> 4. The CAB is a snapshot of the FAB when the APP is ready to initiate an address book rotation.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
4. The CAB is a snapshot of the FAB when the app is ready to initiate an address book rotation.
```

Author: made lower case

5. The AAB is replaced by the CAB on a software upgrade if the consensus roster derived from the CAB has enough key
   material to generate ledger signatures.
6. The CAB is not adopted and the previous AAB remains the existing AAB after a software upgrade if the CAB does not

>    have enough key material to generate ledger signatures.

Author: Added a note

Prior to restart for upgrade,  `candidate` consensus roster will be set in the platform state by the app in such a way
as to mark it clearly as the next consensus roster. This methodology replaces the previous methodology in DAB Phase
2, which was to write a new `config.txt` to disk. After the `TSS-Roster` proposal has been implemented, the only
need for a file on disk is the genesis address book at the start of a new network.

Once the correct address book and consensus roster life-cycle is in place through the `TSS-Roster` proposal, this
proposal only introduces the logistics of generating the key material and the logic for deciding to adopt the CAB in
replacement of the AAB.

#### TSS Algorithm

The threshold signature scheme chosen for our implementation is detailed in https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/339. This
scheme is able to meet the core requirements listed above. The rest of this proposal details the design of how to
implement this scheme in the consensus nodes.

> The Groth21 algorithm uses Shamir Secret Sharing to hide the private key of the ledger and distribute shares of it

Reviewer 8: I assume https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/339 is the Groth21 algorithm? Please make that more clear.

Author: I modified the link in the previous paragraph to give the title of the paper and use the term `Groth21` in parenthesis.

> The Groth21 algorithm uses Shamir Secret Sharing to hide the private key of the ledger and distribute shares of it

Reviewer 8: I have no idea what Shamir Secret Sharing is. A very short description like "Shamir Secret Sharing is an algorithm that is used in many TSS algorithms for key hiding" would be enough.

Author: I will ask the reader to refer to the `TSS-Library` effort for greater details.

Author: I'll skip adding this link: https://letmegooglethat.com/?q=Shamir+Secret+Sharing

than 1/3 + 1 of the nodes to ensure that no 1/3 will collude to recover the ledger private key.

The Groth21 algorithm requires specific Elliptic Curve (EC)s with the ability to produce bilinear pairings. Each
node will need its own long-term EC key pair on the curve for use in the groth21 TSS algorithm. Each node receives
some number of shares in proportion to the consensus weight assigned to it. Each share is an EC key pair on the
same curve. All public keys of the shares are known, and aggregating a threshold number of share public keys will
produce the ledger id. Only the node has access to the private key of its own shares. Each node must keep their
private keys to themselves since a threshold number of share private keys can aggregate to recover the ledger
private key. An aggregate number of signatures on the same message from the share private keys will aggregate to
recover the ledger signature on the message.

Transferring the ability to generate ledger signatures from one set of consensus nodes to another is done by having
each node generate a `TssMessage` for each share that fractures the share into a number of subshares or `shares of

> shares`. Each `Share of a share` is encrypted with the public key of the node in the next consensus roster that it

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
shares`. Each `share of a share` is encrypted with the public key of the node in the next consensus roster that it
```

Author: made lowercase

belongs to so that only the intended node can use the `share of a share` to recover that node's share's private key.  
The collection of `TssMessages` generated from nodes in the previous consensus roster forms the `key material` for
the new consensus roster. To bootstrap a network and generate the ledger private and public keys, each node creates
a random share for themselves and generates a `TssMessage` containing `shares of shares` for the total number of shares

> needed in the consensus roster. The use of random shares at the outset creates a random ledger private key that nobody

Reviewer 8: Again a diagram would help a lot. Your text is really well written, but it is a super complexe topic - at least for me ;)

Author: adding diagram.

If and when the Ethereum ecosystem adopts BLS12_381, we will likely switch over to that more secure curve.

##### New Elliptic Curve Node Keys

Each node will need a new long-term EC key pair in addition to the existing RSA key pair. The EC key pair will be
used in the Groth21 algorithm to generate and decrypt `TSS-Messages`. These new EC Keys will not be used for
signing messages, only for generating the shares. It is the share keys that are used to sign messages. The public
keys of these long-term node specific EC keys must be in the address book.

##### Groth21 Drawbacks

The Groth21 algorithm is not able to model arbitrary precision proportions of weight assigned to nodes in the
network. For example if each node in a 4 node network received 1 share, then every share has a weight of 1/4.
If there are a total of N shares, then the distribution of weight can only be modeled in increments of (1/N) * total
weight. The cost of re-keying the network in an address book change is quadratic in the number of shares. This forces us
to pick a number of total shares with a max value in the thousands. This modeling of weight is a discrete using small

> integer precision.

Reviewer 4: Not sure I can parse `This modeling of weight is a discrete using small
integer precision.`

Is there an `of` missing right after `using`? I'd suggest to rephrase this sentence to make it easier to understand.

Author: I've updated it.

#### Alternatives Considered

> The list of options considered here were based off of prototypes developed by Rohit Sinha, the Swirlds Labs

Reviewer 8: Does it makes sense to name Rohit Sinha here? if yes, can we link to the GitHub profile?

Author: linked to Rohit's profile

cryptography expert. The Groth21 algorithm was chosen because it was efficient for use in smart contract
verification, and we could assign a multiplicity of shares to nodes to get close enough in modeling the
distribution of weight between nodes.

| Requirement | hinTS | Groth21 |
|-------------|-------|---------|
| TSS-001     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-002     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-003     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-004     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-005     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-006     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-007     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-008     | No    | Yes     |
| TSS-009     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-010     | Yes   | No      |

##### hinTS

The hinTS algorithm is a threshold signature scheme that is able to measure double precision distributions of weight
across nodes. The complicating factor with hinTS is that during an address book change over, a recursive proof needs
to be constructed to prove that the new roster is a descendent of the original genesis roster. Validation of this
recursive proof proved too expensive for EVM smart contracts.

### Goals

The following capabilities are the goals of this proposal:

> 1. `Ledger Signing API` - Given a message, the consensus nodes sign the message with shares and aggregate the signatures

Reviewer 8: Is that a public api (that is used for example by services / EVM / ...) or is that aprivate api within the platform?

Author: I've clarified that the app asks the platform to sign a message.

1. Achieving a fully dynamic address book life-cycle.

### Dependencies, Interactions, and Implications

Dependencies on the TSS-Library

* At minimum, the top-level API in the TSS-Library is defined and can be mocked for initial development.
* The complete implementation of the TSS-Library is required for the TSS-Ledger-ID proposal to be fully implemented.
* Consensus nodes must have their `elGamelKey` generated with the private key stored on disk and the public key
  stored in the roster prior to the TSS-Ledger-ID proposal being delivered.

Dependencies on the TSS-Roster

* At minimum, the `Roster` API is defined with an AddressBook wrapper for initial development and testing.
* Delivery of TSS-Ledger-ID will require that the TSS-Roster proposal is delivered in a prior release.

Impacts of TSS-Ledger-ID to Services Team

* The timing of submitting the candidate roster may need to be adjusted to allow enough time for the candidate
  roster to have key material generated.
* Services will need to know or detect when the candidate roster fails to be adopted due to not having enough key
  material generated.
* The node's public `elGamalKey` will need to be added to the address book.

>     * This requires modification of the HAPI transactions that manage the address book.

Author: changed

platform. This value should not change during address book changes and its value does not change unless the network
goes through a another TSS bootstrap process. Since its value is not expected to change, storing it in a singleton
Merkle Leaf by itself is appropriate.

TODO: Protobuf of data

##### Consensus Rosters

This proposal extends the roster data format where each `RosterEntry` has a new `elGamalKey` called a
`tssEcKey` that is used in the Groth21 algorithm.

TODO: Protobuf of data

##### Key Material (TSS Data Map)

The TSS Data Map is a combined map of all the key material for all rosters that are
tracked and the votes by nodes that have validated the key material.

TODO:  Separate the maps since the state API can handle them separate.

Keys in the TSS Data Map have the following structure: (KeyType, RosterHash, SequenceNumber).

1. KeyType - An enum that is one of TSS_MESSAGE or TSS_VOTE.
2. RosterHash - The hash of the consensus roster that the message or vote is related to.
3. SequenceNumber - The order in which the message or vote came to consensus.

The value associated with a TSS_MESSAGE key is the pair (ShareId, TssMessage)

> 1. ShareId - The id of the share that the message is related to.

Author: When the nodes vote that they are ready to adopt the new roster, the structure of the vote is a bit vector where the index of each bit corresponds to the share id.   The votes communicate which TssMessages were used, through correspondence to share id.

> 1. ShareId - The id of the share that the message is related to.

Author: Per our discussion, the public shares are returned in a list which creates an ordering on the shares.  Share 0 is the first share whose public key in the list.  Share 1 is the second, etc.  This gives an ordering on TssMessages.  This has no association to any concept of share id at the library level.

2. TssMessage - the raw bytes of the TssMessage

> TODO: protobuf for TssMessage (modify the TSS-Library proposal)

Author: I explained the need for shareId.   I agree.  I think the TssMessages should remain an opaque blob of bytes.    But I still need an absolute order on TssMessages so that I can use a bit-vector for voting.

> TODO: protobuf for TssMessage (modify the TSS-Library proposal)

Author: I think we reached consensus on our conversation.

> TODO: protobuf for TssMessage (modify the TSS-Library proposal)

Author: changing all usage to `tssEncryptionKey`

# TSS-Ledger-ID

---

## Summary

This proposal is for the integration of a threshold signature scheme into the consensus nodes to create a
private/public key pair for the ledger that can be used to sign blocks. The private key must be a secret that no one
knows. The public key is known by all and functions as the ledger id. The consensus nodes must be able to aggregate
their individual signatures on a message into a valid ledger signature that is verifiable by the ledger id. Part of our
goal is that users could write EVM smart contracts that can verify the block signatures.

| Metadata           | Entities                                   | 
|--------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| Designers          | Edward, Cody, Austin, Kore, Anthony, Artem |
| Functional Impacts | Services, DevOps                           |
| Related Proposals  | TSS-Library, TSS-Roster, TSS-Block-Signing |
| HIPS               | N/A                                        |

---

## Purpose and Context

> The purpose of this proposal is to integrate a BLS based Threshold Signature Schemes (TSS) into consensus nodes to

Author: I'm adding a link to the wikipedia page for BLS

give a network a ledger id and create a way of signing the root hash of blocks such that the signature can be

> verified by the ledger id.

Author: changed to verified using

2. The `TSS-Roster` proposal introduces the data structure of a consensus `Roster` to replace the platform's concept of
   an `AddressBook` and modifies the life-cycle for when the platform receives new consensus rosters.
3. This proposal (`TSS-Ledger-ID`) depends on the first two proposals and is for the integration of a threshold
   signature scheme into the consensus node, delivering the ability for the ledger to sign a message with the
   ledger private key.
4. The `TSS-Block-Signing` proposal is everything needed to support the signing of blocks and generation of block
   proofs.

This  `TSS-Ledger-ID` proposal covers changes to the following elements:

* The process of generating the ledger key pair for new networks and existing networks.
* The process of transferring the ability of the ledger to sign a message from one set of consensus nodes to another.
* The new state data structures needed to store TSS Key material and the ledger id.
* The new components needed in the framework to support creating and transferring the ledger key.
* The modified startup process to initialize the signing capability.

> * For each node, the creation of a new Elliptic Curve (EC) key called its `tssEcKey` that is used in creating shares.

Author: name changed to `tssEncryptionKey`

   [precompiles that are available in the EVM](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1829.md).

### Non-Goals

The following are not goals of this proposal:

1. Achieving a fully dynamic address book life-cycle.

### Dependencies, Interactions, and Implications

Dependencies on the TSS-Library

* At minimum, the top-level API in the TSS-Library is defined and can be mocked for initial development.
* The complete implementation of the TSS-Library is required for the TSS-Ledger-ID proposal to be fully implemented.
* Consensus nodes must have their `elGamelKey` generated with the private key stored on disk and the public key
  stored in the roster prior to the TSS-Ledger-ID proposal being delivered.

Dependencies on the TSS-Roster

* At minimum, the `Roster` API is defined with an AddressBook wrapper for initial development and testing.
* Delivery of TSS-Ledger-ID will require that the TSS-Roster proposal is delivered in a prior release.

Impacts of TSS-Ledger-ID to Services Team

* The timing of submitting the candidate roster may need to be adjusted to allow enough time for the candidate

>   roster to have key material generated.

Author: I have a metric earmarked for number of votes cast.   That metric could easily be used to count number of votes relative to the threshold needed to adopt the roster.    In terms of enforcement, there is nothing that I can think of that we should do from the platform side to enforce the timing.  At best we can raise awareness.   There might be situations where we want to go ahead with a software upgrade even when the candidate roster is not ready to be adopted and is not adopted.

verifiable by the ledger id. Through signing a block with the ledger private key, we can use Merkle Proofs to
extend the signature to cover the contents of the block and the state changes processed in that round. This forms
the basis of Block Proofs and provides a way for external parties to verify that certain facts are true on the ledger
at a particular point in time. Part of our goal is that users could write EVM smart contracts that can verify the
Block Proofs and make decisions based on their claims.

| Metadata           | Entities                                   | 
|--------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| Designers          | Edward, Cody, Austin, Kore, Anthony, Artem |
| Functional Impacts | Services, DevOps                           |
| Related Proposals  | TSS-Library, TSS-Roster, TSS-Block-Signing |
| HIPS               | N/A                                        |

---

## Purpose and Context

Users of a ledger want to have cryptographic proofs that a statement was true on the ledger at a particular point in
time. Our chosen method for providing these types of proofs is to assign a permanent public/private key pair to the

> ledger for use in signing blocks and constructing block proofs. The ledger private key must be a secret that no one

Reviewer 5: I think it makes more sense to describe the purpose of this proposal as signing block hashes to prove the integrity of the blocks in a way that only the ledger id is required in order to verify. The fact that block nodes will use these signatures to produce state proofs is another matter.

> ledger for use in signing blocks and constructing block proofs. The ledger private key must be a secret that no one

Author: I am removing mention of block proof and just focussing on block root hash signing.

   signature scheme into the consensus node, delivering the ability for the ledger to sign a message with the
   ledger private key.
4. The `TSS-Block-Signing` proposal is everything needed to support the signing of blocks and generation of block
   proofs.

This  `TSS-Ledger-ID` proposal covers changes to the following elements:

* The process of generating the ledger key pair for new networks and existing networks.
* The process for signing a message with the ledger private key.
* The process of transferring the ability of the ledger to sign a message from one set of consensus nodes to another.
* The new state data structures needed to store TSS Key material and the ledger id.
* The new components needed in the framework to support creating and transferring the ledger key.
* The modified startup process to initialize the signing capability.

### Goals

The following capabilities are the goals of this proposal:

1. `Ledger Signing API` - The app gives a message to the platform to sign. The platform signs the message with its
   shares, gossips the signatures, and aggregates share signatures into a ledger signature. The ledger signature is

>    returned to the app through the `PlatformPublisher`.

Author: I'll move this API to the Block Signing proposal.

2. `TSS Bootstrap on Existing Network` - Able to setup an existing network with a ledger public/private key pair.
3. `TSS Bootstrap for New Network` - Able to setup a new network with a ledger public/private key pair.
4. `Keying The Next Roster` - Able to transfer the ability to sign a message with the ledger private key from one set of
   consensus nodes to another.

### Non-Goals

The following are not goals of this proposal:

1. Achieving a fully dynamic address book life-cycle.
2. Block Proofs or the signing of blocks.
3. Verification of signed messages beyond the consensus node.
    * It is not within the scope of this proposal and effort to develop, test, and deploy a smart contract that can
      verify a block proof. It is expected that mathematics works and that our use of the ALT-BN128 curve will
      dovetail with the

>       [precompiles that are available in the EVM](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1829.md).

Reviewer 5: I agree that this is not in the scope of work to be performed by the platform team, but it would be a very good idea to see if someone from the SC team could do this. We should have some idea of the gas required for verifying the aggregate signature and double check that it does in fact work. Would you be willing to include it in this proposal as long as the work is done by someone on the SC team?

Author: I've modified the goals as follows: 
 * removal of the ledger signing API 
 * added testing of the signature scheme with verification by a smart contract.

### Dependencies, Interactions, and Implications

Dependencies on the TSS-Library

> * At minimum, the top-level API in the TSS-Proposal is defined and can be mocked for initial development.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* At minimum, the top-level API in the TSS-Library is defined and can be mocked for initial development.
```

Author: adopted

  adopted the address book containing the new node.

Implications Of Completion

* The consensus nodes will be able to create ledger signatures for use in block proofs.
* TSS-Block-Signing proposal becomes unblocked for development.

### Requirements

TSS Core Requirements

| Requirement ID | Requirement Description                                                                                                      |
|----------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| TSS-001        | The ledger MUST have a public/private signing key pair that does not change when the consensus roster changes.               |
| TSS-002        | The ledger private key MUST be a secret that nobody knows.                                                                   |
| TSS-003        | The `ledger id` MUST be a public key that everyone knows and able to verify signatures from the ledger private key.          |
| TSS-004        | The ledger signature for a message MUST be produced through a threshold number of consensus nodes signing the message.       |

> | TSS-005        | There MUST be a way to bootstrap an existing network's consensus roster with to give the ledger a public/private signing key |

Author: updating text.

| TSS-006        | There MUST be a way for a new network to generate a public/private signing key for the ledger.                               |

> | TSS-007        | There MUST be a way to rotate the ledger's public/private signing key.                                                       |

Author: No one has talked about it significantly, but I'm putting it in there because without it there is no way to recover from the situation where a anyone, let alone a bad actor, gets ahold of the ledger private key.    Services would need to create a new HAPI transaction that would require GC sign-off that would trigger this event:  break-glass-in-case-of-emergency.   I think someone getting ahold of the ledger private key is worse than a catastrophic ISS.    They could sign whatever they want with it.

> | TSS-007        | There MUST be a way to rotate the ledger's public/private signing key.                                                       |

Author: I'm going to leave the services side of it to the tss-block-signing proposal.

> | TSS-007        | There MUST be a way to rotate the ledger's public/private signing key.                                                       |

Reviewer 9: >  I think someone getting ahold of the ledger private key is worse than a catastrophic ISS

I would agree. IMO this isn't something that would be recoverable, it would be the end of the network (and thus doesn't warrant consideration). Though other's could disagree. I think leaving it to services is a reasonable choice.

> | TSS-008        | The ledger signature SHOULD be verifiable by an EVM smart contract without excessive cost or time.                           |

Author: modified to gas cost

> | TSS-009        | The TSS implementation SHOULD be able to switch elliptic curves.                                                             |

Reviewer 5: I stated this before, but i'll repeat - some of these requirements apply to the TSS-Library proposal instead of this one

Author: It's the requirements at this level that determined which TSS approach we went with.  If there was an existing library and we didn't have to write our own implementation, this requirement would still exist and it would get documented here in determining which library we choose.

| TSS-010        | The TSS algorithm SHOULD be able to model consensus weight with high precision.                                              |
| TSS-011        | Minimize the number of steps a Node Operator needs to perform.                                                               |

Block Signing Requirements

| Requirement ID | Requirement Description                               |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------------------|

> | TSSBS-001      | The initial block in the block stream MUST be signed. |

Reviewer 5: with TSS? I assume not RSA

Author: I've added the requirement that the block signature be verifiable with the ledger id.

| TSSBS-002      | On a new network, the initial block MUST be block 0   |

### Design Decisions

> #### New Address Book Life-Cycle

Reviewer 5: I think this entire section belongs in the TSS-Roster proposal. @kfa-aguda do you agree?

Author: While the TSS-Roster does the bulk of the changes, the `TSS-Ledger-ID` proposal has to modify the life-cycle from where the TSS-Roster left off.  I am recounting the TSS-Roster life-cycle so I have a baseline to change.  I can leave it off if you like and tell the reader to go read the TSS-Roster proposal before this one.

Author: I've removed the section that presents the TSS-Roster life-cycle.

The TSS-Roster design proposal will deliver after Dynamic Address Book (DAB) Phase 2 and must be delivered at least

> 1 release prior to the TSS-Ledger-ID proposal. This proposal modifies the address book and roster lifecycle

Author: The ambiguous sentence was removed.

> presented in TSS-Roster. To explain the modification, we present the TSS-Roster life-cycle here:

Author: I've engaged the comment on the TSS-Roster proposal, I don't think it has any impact here.

> presented in TSS-Roster. To explain the modification, we present the TSS-Roster life-cycle here:

Reviewer 9: Agreed, now that the stuff about the roster lifecycle has been removed.

shares`. Each `share of a share` is encrypted with the public key of the node in the next consensus roster that it
belongs to so that only the intended node can use the `share of a share` to recover that node's share's private key.
The collection of `TssMessages` generated from nodes in the previous consensus roster forms the `key material` for
the new consensus roster. To bootstrap a network and generate the ledger private and public keys, each node creates
a random share for themselves and generates a `TssMessage` containing `shares of shares` for the total number of shares
needed in the consensus roster. The use of random shares at the outset creates a random ledger private key that nobody
knows.

![TSS re-keying next consensus roster](./Groth21-re-keying-shares-of-shares.drawio.svg)

This process of re-keying the next consensus roster during an address book change takes an asynchronous amount of
time through multiple rounds of consensus to complete. This requires saving incremental progress in the state to ensure
that the process can resume from any point if a node or the network restarts. Switching to the next consensus roster

> cannot happen until that roster has enough nodes able to recover a threshold number of shares so that an aggregation of

Reviewer 9: > until that roster has enough nodes able to recover a threshold number of shares

I don't think I understand this statement. Since a TSS message contains data bound for each and every share owner, either *everyone* can recover their shares, or *no one* can.

Author: I've modified the statement for clarity.  Please re-review it when I push it.

node signatures can generate the ledger signature.

##### Elliptic Curve Decisions

> Our first implementation of Groth21 will use the ALT_BN128 elliptic curve which is in use and verifiable by EVMs.  

Reviewer 9: Technically, it's because there exists precompiled contracts to do pairings for `ALT_BN128`. Any curve is verifiable, just not cheaply.

Author: I've modified the statement to reflect it is due to the existence of precompiles.

> If and when the Ethereum ecosystem adopts BLS12_381, we will likely switch over to that more secure curve.

Reviewer 9: > we will likely switch over

Is it accurate to say this is "likely"? It would be a big deal to switch, I suspect we would only do so if the reason was reaaally compelling (which might be the case, I'm just not sure)

##### New Elliptic Curve Node Keys

Each node will need a new long-term EC key pair in addition to the existing RSA key pair. The EC key pair will be

> used in the Groth21 algorithm to generate and decrypt `TSS-Messages`. These new EC Keys will not be used for

Author: I'm adopting `elGamalKey` key per your suggestion.  It doesn't roll off the tongue and I would prefer to find a better name that might be suggestive of function in ordinary minds.  `elGamal` requires significant domain knowledge for the name to make sense.

> used in the Groth21 algorithm to generate and decrypt `TSS-Messages`. These new EC Keys will not be used for

Author: I've been calling it the `tssEcKey` just in case we ever adopt a different EC key for a different purpose in the future.   I will change the usage to that.

> used in the Groth21 algorithm to generate and decrypt `TSS-Messages`. These new EC Keys will not be used for

Reviewer 9: The problem is, *all* of the keys in the scheme are EC keys. And *everything* is for TSS. It's like naming a specific platform component `javaObjectComponent`.

network. For example if each node in a 4 node network received 1 share, then every share has a weight of 1/4.
If there are a total of N shares, then the distribution of weight can only be modeled in increments of (1/N) * total
weight. The cost of re-keying the network in an address book change is quadratic in the number of shares. (See the
picture of TssMessages above.) This forces us to pick a number of total shares with a max value in the thousands.
This modeling of weight uses small integer precision.

##### Calculating Number of Shares from Weight

Given that we have a low resolution for modeling weight, the number of shares assigned to each node will be
calculated as follows:

* Let `M` be the max number of shares that any node can have.
* Let `maxweight` be the max weight assigned to any node.
* Let `weight(node)` be the weight assigned to the node.
* Let `numShares(node)` be the number of shares assigned to the node.
* then `numShares(node) = ceiling(M * weight(node) / maxweight)` where the operations are floating point.

##### Threshold for recovery of Signatures and Ledger Id.

> Our public claim is that we can tolerate up to 1/3 of the stake assigned to malicious nodes. Our

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The network must be able to tolerate up to 1/3 of the stake assigned to malicious nodes. Our
```

Author: Adopted the change.

threshold for recovery of ledger signatures and the ledger id must be strictly greater than the following values:

> 1. `floor(TS/3)` where `TS` is the total number of shares.

Author: I am modifying to `floor(TS/3)+N` where `TS` is the total number of shares and `N` is the number of nodes with shares.   That will account for any under counting with the ceiling operation rounding up on fractions.

> 2. `M` where `M` is the max number of shares assigned to any node.

Reviewer 5: i'm confused, M is not used in the calculation below. Should it be?

Reviewer 5: Also, it's not clear to me how the math shows that if 1/3 nodes by stake are bad actors, that it is impossible for them to recover the secret. Could you add a clear explanation for that here?

Author: After a conversation with Leemon, `M` cannot be a lower bound to the threshold due to support for 1 and 2 node networks.  Networks with 1 or 2 nodes must trust that the nodes are honest because one of the nodes will be able to recover the ledger private key if they were dishonest.

Author: I've removed the 2nd criteria.

| Requirement | hinTS | Groth21 |
|-------------|-------|---------|
| TSS-001     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-002     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-003     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-004     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-005     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-006     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-007     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-008     | No    | Yes     |
| TSS-009     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-010     | Yes   | No      |

###### hinTS

The hinTS algorithm is a threshold signature scheme that is able to measure double precision distributions of weight
across nodes. The complicating factor with hinTS is that during an address book change over, a recursive proof needs
to be constructed to prove that the new roster is a descendent of the original genesis roster. Validation of this
recursive proof proved too expensive for EVM smart contracts.

#### TSS Bootstrap Process

The TSS bootstrap process is the process of generating the ledger public/private key pair for a new network or an
existing network. There are several options to consider in the TSS bootstrap process:

1. Do we allow block number and round number to be out of sync?
2. Do we need the initial block produced to be signed by the ledger id?

> 3. For new networks, Do we need to produce a signed block 0?

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
3. For new networks, do we need to produce a signed block 0?
```

Author: adopted change

4. For existing networks, does the TSS bootstrap roster sign blocks prior to its existence?

##### For New Networks

There will be a pre-genesis phase where the genesis roster is keyed and a random ledger id is created. This will
happen through running the platform without application transactions. After the platform keys the roster, the
platform restarts itself with a copy of the genesis state and adding to it the TSS key material and ledger
id. After platform restart, application transactions are accepted and the platform starts building the new hashgraph

> from round 0. This process ensures that block 0 containing application transactions is signed by the ledger and

Author: makes sense to me.

> from round 0. This process ensures that block 0 containing application transactions is signed by the ledger and

Author: I have modified the language to be ambiguous as to the number of the first block, whether it is 1 or 0.

> from round 0. This process ensures that block 0 containing application transactions is signed by the ledger and

Author: just checked, round 1 is the first round to come out of consensus

verifiable with the ledger id.

While this solution does not have the history of setting up the ledger id in the hashgraph after platform restart,
the nodes can cryptographically verify that the setup process took place correctly through using the TSS key material to
re-derive the ledger id. Each node can validate the TssMessages have come from a sufficient variety of nodes. With
the assumption that no greater than 1/3 of the nodes are malicious, the threshold of 1/2 ensures that the malicious

> nodes will not be able to recover the ledger id if they collude together.

Author: yes, thanks for the catch.

The process of the platform restarting itself after performing a pre-genesis keying phase is new startup logic.  
This should not involve an interruption of the containing process. While we are in the pre-genesis phase the

> platform will not accept application transactions. Once the platform has restarted itself with a keyed roster, it

Author: I've added a paragraph explaining that a node in pre-genesis cannot gossip with a node in post-genesis and it must perform a reconnect to receive the updated state containing the key-material and ledger id.

Option 2 was chosen for existing networks and Option 8 was selected for new networks. This decision was made to
ensure that the first block in the block stream is signed by the ledger and that new networks always have block 0
signed.

---

## Changes

The changes are presented in the following order:

1. Public API
2. Core Behaviors
3. Component Architecture
4. Configuration
5. Metrics
6. Performance

### Public API

The public API changes consist of the following:

* The Ledger Signature API
* System Transactions
* State Data Structures

#### Ledger Signature API

The Ledger Signature API is the interface between the application and the platform by which the application submits
a message to be signed by the ledger, the nodes sign the message with their shares, and the platform aggregates the
signatures into a ledger signature. The ledger signature is then asynchronously returned to the application.

To request a ledger signature, the application invokes a new method on the `State`:

> * `State::sign(byte[] message) throws NotReadyException`

Author: Changed to `SwirldState`.  I think that's the top-level interface for the state I was thinking of.   Let me know if this makes more or less sense.

> * `State::sign(byte[] message) throws NotReadyException`

Reviewer 9: I don't think this should be a method on _any_ kind of state. It doesn't result in the state changing, and doesn't need to be deterministic.

If we decide to keep the current strategy of an outside entity passing in a message for the platform to sign, I think there needs to be a different way of passing the message into the platform.

To receive a ledger signature, the application registers a callback with the platform builder:

> * `PlatformBuilder::withLedgerSignatureCallback(Consumer<PairingSignature> ledgerSignatureConsumer)`

Reviewer 5: Is the reason for communicating the signature outside of the state where the application can read the value on the handle thread so that if consensus is paused or stops, or if we re-implement quiescence, the signature is still provided? If so, i think that explanation should be provided.

#### System Transactions

The following are new system transactions needed to key rosters and generate ledger signatures.

##### TssMessage System Transaction

TODO: Protobuf of data

##### TssVote System Transaction

TODO: Protobuf of data

##### TssShareSignature System Transaction

TODO: Protobuf of data

#### State Datastructures

The state needs to store the relevant ledger id, consensus rosters, key material, and partially constructed ledger
signatures.

##### Ledger Id

> The `ledgerId` is the public ledger key able to verify ledger signatures. It is used by both the application and the

Reviewer 9: What use does the app have for the ledger id?

Author: The app, perhaps no use.  but the block node would have a use.

Author: Modified the text.

platform. This value should not change during address book changes and its value does not change unless the network

> goes through a another TSS bootstrap process. Since its value is not expected to change, storing it in a singleton

Reviewer 9: > through a another

grammar

Author: fixed

Merkle Leaf by itself is appropriate.

TODO: Protobuf of data

##### Consensus Rosters

This proposal extends the roster data format where each `RosterEntry` has a new long term public EC key called a
`tssEcKey` that is used in the Groth21 algorithm.

TODO: Protobuf of data

##### Key Material (TSS Data Map)

> The TSS Data Map is a Map Merkle Leaf that is a combined map of all the key material for all rosters that are

Reviewer 9: I don't think a map is an acceptable leaf type under the upcoming "giant tree" state structure, but my intuitions here are still underdeveloped. Perhaps a synchronous meeting between you, me, Ivan, and whoever else wants to join would be helpful.

For anyone's context, the "giant tree" state structure is the latest plan for how we want to structure our state. There isn't any documentation yet, as this is a new plan handed down from above. I plan to start drafting documentation, but haven't yet had a chance. Timelines also aren't clear to me yet.

tracked and the votes by nodes that have validated the key material.

Keys in the TSS Data Map have the following structure: (KeyType, RosterHash, SequenceNumber).

1. KeyType - An enum that is one of TSS_MESSAGE or TSS_VOTE.
2. RosterHash - The hash of the consensus roster that the message or vote is related to.
3. SequenceNumber - The order in which the message or vote came to consensus.

The value associated with a TSS_MESSAGE key is the pair (ShareId, TssMessage)

1. ShareId - The id of the share that the message is related to.

> 2. TssMessage - the raw bytes of the TssMessage

Reviewer 9: Maybe the TssMessage should be defined as a protobuf, which contains a field for share ID. Then this entry wouldn't be a pair, rather just a single protobuf object

The value associated with a TSS_VOTE key is a bit vector with the following interpretation

* The order of bits from the least significant bit to the most significant bit corresponds to the numeric order of
  share ids from least to greatest.

> * If a bit is set to 1, then the TssMessage for the corresponding ShareId was valid and contributed to a successful

Reviewer 9: > and contributed to a successful reconstruction of the ledger id.

I think I understand what you are getting at, but this isn't fully correct. Take, for example, the case where the threshold of valid messages was NOT met. In this case, a node should vote `1` for the messages that were valid, even though these messages did not contribute to a successful reconstruction.

Maybe the way to express this idea is to say that valid messages receive a vote of `1`, but that nodes only vote `1` for the first `threshold` number of valid messages (in consensus order), and that all subsequent messages receive a vote of `0`

Author: I think I have fixed the wording.  Even when the threshold is not met, the tss message would only get a 1 if it is one of the first `threshold` number of valid TssMessages in consensus order.

  reconstruction of the ledger id.
* If a bit is set to 0, then the TssMessage for the corresponding ShareId was either invalid, was not received, or
  was not used in the reconstruction of the ledger id.
* If the sum of the bits is greater than the threshold, then the vote is a yes vote in favor of adopting the
  candidate roster.

Lifecycle Invariants

1. Inserts should only be made for candidate rosters that are going through the keying process.
2. When a roster is no longer stored in the state, the corresponding key material should be removed.
3. Every roster that has become active after the TSS bootstrap process must have sufficient key material to be

>    able to recover the ledger id.

Reviewer 9: > able to recover the ledger id

While this is correct, I'm not sure we need to bring up "recovering" the ledger ID. Really, what we are looking for is a threshold number of valid TSS messages. The fact that a threshold number of valid TSS messages can be used to recompute the ledger ID seems to me like merely a side effect.

Author: or a "double check your work" and throw an exception if this invariant is ever violated.

TODO: Protobuf of data

##### Partial Ledger Signatures

> For a configured number of rounds, share signatures on a message are stored in the state until a threshold number of

Reviewer 9: I don't understand why we would need to store partial signatures in the state.

Author: Now that we have gotten rid of guaranteed signing, we don't need to.  If a node cannot reconstruct the ledger signature because it missed partial signatures, oh well.   Hopefully at least 1 other node could, and at worst a later block's signature will cover the gap.

them have been collected to produce the ledger id. Each time a signature on a message is added to the collection,

> the round counter resets. Once the ledger id is produced, it is stored with the other signatures and no new

Reviewer 9: > round counter resets

What is a round counter? I don't see any other mentions in this doc

Author: removed since we're dropping guaranteed signing.

> the round counter resets. Once the ledger id is produced, it is stored with the other signatures and no new

Reviewer 9: > Once the ledger id is produced

Are you saying we "produce" a ledger ID every round? Perhaps you meant aggregate signature?

If you *do* mean aggregate signature, why would that go in the state?

Author: removed since we're not doing guaranteed signing.

signatures are added to the collection. Once a configured number of rounds have passed after the last signature
added to a collection for a message, the signatures are removed from the state.

The partial ledger signatures are stored in a Map Merkle Leaf where the keys are the message hash and the values are
a tuple (List<ShareSignature>, LedgerSignature, lastRoundUpdated).

TODO: Protobuf of data

### Core Behaviors

The new behavior is related to the bootstrap process of creating the ledger id, transferring the ability to sign
messages from one roster to the next roster, and creating ledger signatures.

> #### TSS Bootstrap for New Networks

Reviewer 9: It seems a bit odd that there are 2 different sections in this document describing bootstrapping. There is this of the heading under `Core Behaviors`, but there's a different section under `Design Decisions`. I'm not clear on what the difference is, and why which information goes in which section.

Author: I have modified this section to focus on the startup sequence in detail.

At the start of a new network there will be a new pre-genesis phase to generate the key material for the genesis
roster and then restart the network from round 0 with the new key material and ledger id.

The following startup sequence is modified from existing practices.

1. Inversion of Control - The app hands a genesis state, genesis roster, and private keys to the platform.
2. The platform copies the genesis state and starts gossiping with peers without accepting user transactions.
3. The platform automatically begins to key the genesis roster with a ledger id.
4. Once the ledger id is created and a threshold number of nodes have voted to being ready to restart, the platform

>    updates the state with the key material and ledger id and restarts from round 0.

Reviewer 9: > updates the state

It's unclear to me what "the state" is referring to here.

The described sequence of events seems to have the platform in the driver's seat. Am I understanding your intention correctly?

If so, I'm wondering if it's the correct strategy. Here is an alternate sequence I'm thinking about:
1. Platform is started, and given a genesis state (which, of course, lacks key material)
2. Platform does the genesis keying, and communicates in some way that it is "done"
3. The platform is restarted by an external source, and given a different genesis state after restarting (this time, including the key material, which the external source has extracted from the pre-genesis state)

With this sequence, the platform isn't responsible for copying data from here to there. It just does the keying, puts the key material in the state, and that's it.

Author: Your alternative requires this additional behavior: 
1. communicating to the App that it is done with pre-genesis.   (The app now has to be aware of the more complicated platform life-cycle so it can restart the platform.) 
2.a. The key material has to be handed to the app and the app has to figure out how to add the key-material to the state (something that the platform should do.) 
2.b.  Alternatively the platform hands back the modified genesis state to the app. 
3. The app restarts the platform and hands back the genesis state with the key material added to it. 

2.a.  is way too much of a burden on the app and its something the platform is already doing. 
2.b. makes little sense since the app is going to hand the state it just got right back to the platform. 

The platform just needs a small bit of logic at the beginning to restart itself and allow the app to be oblivious that the platform restart is even happening.  

I'm not convinced burdening the app with this responsibility is the right solution.

* The process of transferring the ability of the ledger to sign a message from one set of consensus nodes to another.
* The new state data structures needed to store TSS Key material and the ledger id.
* The new components needed in the framework to support creating and transferring the ledger key.
* The modified startup process to initialize the signing capability.
* For each node, the creation of a new Elliptic Curve (EC) key called its `tssEncryptionKey` that is used in creating
  shares.

### Goals

The following capabilities are the goals of this proposal:

1. `TSS Bootstrap on Existing Network` - Able to setup an existing network with a ledger public/private key pair.
2. `TSS Bootstrap for New Network` - Able to setup a new network with a ledger public/private key pair.
3. `Keying The Next Roster` - Able to transfer the ability to sign a message with the ledger private key from one
   set of consensus nodes to another.
4. Testing of the TSS signing capability with verification by an EVM smart contract using the ALT_BN128
   [precompiles that are available in the EVM](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1829.md).

### Non-Goals

> The following are not goals of this proposal:

Reviewer 10: I think there might be an opportunity here to highlight whether this work will impact things like ISS. For example, will the introduction of a network ledger ID (as against individual RSA signatures) change the ISS detection algorithm? Though we won't immediately be at DAB Phase 3 but in the long term when we do, will the dynamic adoption of Rosters impact ISS in any way? e.g., if roster changes are happening too frequently? (less likely, but a theoretical possibility).

I don't have an answer to these, but I think it's worth highlighting here even if it's basic details, or in the worst case, we document as unknowns.

Author: I'm indicating here that we are not replacing the RSA key responsibilities.  ISS remains the same.   I will add in the implications section that completion of this effort opens up the possibility of replacing some of the RSA key responsibilities.

5. Metrics
6. Performance

### Public API

The public API changes consist of the following:

* System Transactions
* State Data Structures

#### System Transactions

The following are new system transactions needed to key rosters and generate ledger signatures.

##### TssMessage System Transaction

```protobuf
/**
 * The TssMessageTransaction is used to send a TssMessage to the network for a candidate roster.      
 */
message TssMessageTransaction {

  /**
   * The node id is the id of the node that generated the TssMessage.
   */
  uint64 node_id = 1;

  /**
   * The source roster hash is the hash of the roster containing the node generating the TssMessage.
   */
  bytes source_roster_hash = 2;

  /**
   * The target roster hash is the hash of the roster that the TssMessage is for.
   */
  bytes target_roster_hash = 3;

  /**
   * The share id establishes a global ordering of shares across all shares in the network.  It corresponds to the 
   * index of the public share in the list returned from the TSS library when the share was created.
   */
  uint64 share_id = 4;

  /**
   * The tss_message is the raw bytes of the TssMessage generated by the node for the share_id. 
   */

>   bytes tss_message = 5;

Reviewer 9: It's still duplicate data, though, since the `shareId` is included in the TSS message, and you can determine from that share ID which public key is the correct one to use.

> the consensus node's concept of ShareId comes from the order of public keys in the list

I'm personally not convinced that this is the right design decision. It's *possible* to define things in terms of share index instead of share ID, but I'm not sure what exactly we gain from doing so? It seems like an additional layer of terminology on top of an already serviceable unique identifier.

> It's really happenstance if what I am calling the ShareId lines up with any kind of concept of ShareId inside the TSS-Library

If we do go this route, I don't think we should overlap terminology. If it isn't the same share ID, maybe it should be called a `shareIndex` (and also be stored in a smaller `int`)

>   bytes tss_message = 5;

Reviewer 9: For context:

@edward-swirldslabs , @mxtartaglia-sl , and I discussed this in a call. Key takeaways:

- the duplicate data isn't really a big concern, since it's very little (i.e., we shouldn't let *that alone* have a large impact on the decision)
- there is a goal of not including any protobufs in the Tss Library
- If the concept of a `shareId` is different between the tss library and the consensus node, then there should be separate terminology (with `shareIndex` being a potential option)
- Ed is looking into the potential option of not needing a concept of a share ID on the consensus node *at all*. If this is possible, it makes the whole discussion moot

  /**
   * The signature is produced by the node signing the tuple (source_roster_hash, target_roster_hash, share_id, 
   * tss_message) using its private `tssEncryptionKey`.  The signature is verified by other nodes using the public 
   * `tssEncryptionKey` of the node sending this transaction. 
   */

>   bytes signature = 6;

Reviewer 6: The library would have to handle that as it is not information that would be exposed if we go by the opaque representation of a tssMessage.
Can we get the sender of a message in the platform code? Can it be forged?

>   bytes signature = 6;

Author: Until we hammer out the transaction handling API and whether or not we can get the sender of the event through the transaction handler interface, I am leaving the signatures in the transaction.

   * The least significant bit of byte[0] corresponds to share id 0 and the most significant bit of byte[0] corresponds
   * to share id 7.  The least significant bit of byte[1] corresponds to share id 8 and the most significant bit of
   * byte[1] corresponds to share id 15, and so on.  If a bit is set to 1, then the TssMessage for the corresponding
   * ShareId was received as one of the first Threshold number of valid TssMessages in consensus order.  If a bit is set
   * to 0, then the TssMessage for the corresponding ShareId was either invalid, was not one of the first Threshold
   * number of valid TssMessages in consensus order, or was not received at all by the time the vote was cast.
   * If there is no corresponding share id for a bit, then the bit is set to 0. 
   * If the sum of bits is greater than the threshold, then the vote is a yes vote.  
   */
  bytes tss_vote = 4;

  /**
   * The signature is produced by the node signing the tuple (source_roster_hash, target_roster_hash, tss_vote) using 
   * its private `tssEncryptionKey`.  The signature is verified by other nodes using the public `tssEncryptionKey` 
   * of the node sending this transaction. 
   */

>   bytes signature = 5;

Reviewer 9: If the vote is inside an event created by node x, how would a malicious node modify the vote? Events are signed by the node that creates them, so any modification to the event would be obvious.

I think we are fine if we just don't accept a vote purporting to be for node x unless the vote transaction is contained in an event created by node x.

is adopted as the active roster and the active roster becomes the previous roster.

A roster rotation must be recorded in the state before the rest of the platform uses the state.

#### TSS State Manager

The TSS state manager is executed on the transaction handling thread and is capable of reading and writing the state
during round handling. The logic will be encapsulated in a class with a well-defined API, but this will not be a
full-fledged wiring component outside the consensus round handler.

Responsibilities:

1. Handle `TssMessage` system transactions
    - handled in consensus order
    - insert into the TSS data map if it is legal to do so
        - don’t insert multiple messages for the same node
        - don’t insert any messages if voting window has closed
    - if inserted into the TSS data map, ensure that the message is forwarded to the TSS Message Validator
    - if it is a self TSS message, forward the message to the TSS Message creator.
2. Handle `TssVote` system transactions
    - handled in consensus order
    - insert into TSS data map if it is legal to do so
        - don’t insert multiple votes for the same node
        - don’t insert once voting is closed

>     - after insertion, re-tally votes and decide if voting is now closed

Author: I've modified this section substantially, please re-review.

  shares.

### Goals

The following capabilities are the goals of this proposal:

1. `TSS Bootstrap on Existing Network` - Able to setup an existing network with a ledger public/private key pair.
2. `TSS Bootstrap for New Network` - Able to setup a new network with a ledger public/private key pair.
3. `Keying The Next Roster` - Able to transfer the ability to sign a message with the ledger private key from one
   set of consensus nodes to another.
4. Testing of the TSS signing capability with verification by an EVM smart contract using the ALT_BN128
   [precompiles that are available in the EVM](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1829.md).

### Non-Goals

The following are not goals of this proposal:

1. Achieving a fully dynamic address book life-cycle.
2. Public API for signing blocks.

### Dependencies, Interactions, and Implications

Dependencies on the TSS-Library

* At minimum, the top-level API in the TSS-Library is defined and can be mocked for initial development.
* The complete implementation of the TSS-Library is required for the TSS-Ledger-ID proposal to be fully implemented.

> * Consensus nodes must have their `elGamelKey` generated with the private key stored on disk and the public key

Reviewer 6: tssEncryptionKey

        - if the “no” votes win, then the candidate roster will never be adopted
        - if the “yes” votes win, the candidate roster is now officially confirmed, and will be adopted at the next
          upgrade boundary
3. When a new candidate roster is set.
    - inform the TSS message creator that there is a new candidate roster
    - inform the TSS message validator that there is a new candidate roster
4. Update Metrics
    - indicate whether there is a candidate roster
    - the current number of TSS messages collected for the candidate roster
    - the current number of votes collected for the candidate roster
        - keep different metrics both for “no” votes and “yes” votes
5. On First Round After Restart (After PCES Replay and Reconnect)
    - if there is no candidate roster, take no action
    - if voting is closed, take no action
    - if this node’s TSSMessages are not recorded in the TSSData map, send a message to the TSS message creator (so
      it can resubmit the node’s TSS message)
    - if this node’s vote is not recorded in the TSS data map, inform the TSS message validator that we still need to do
      validation.

> #### TSS Message Creator

Author: Is it possible for a `TssMessageTransaction` to not reach consensus and get handled?  Suppose the node's ISP went down for half an hour.  The event becomes ancient.   Suppose half the shares have their TssMessages get lost due to events going ancient, then we will never be able to key the candidate roster.   We have to have guaranteed `TssMessage` sending.    That means re-sending the message after we do not hear it come back to us.  

Do you see an alternate way of guaranteeing `TssMessages` are sent and handled up until the point that voting is closed?

> #### TSS Message Creator

Author: Are you proposing some other logic hearbeat the candidate roster to the `TssMessageCreator` until the TssMessage from the share is recorded?

> #### TSS Message Creator

Reviewer 9: > Is it possible for a TssMessageTransaction to not reach consensus and get handled

This shouldn't be possible. Tss messages shouldn't be considered pre-consensus

> We have to have guaranteed TssMessage sending

Agreed. I see 2 potential ways that a TssMessage could struggle to reach consensus:

1. An event containing a TssMessage goes stale, but the node doesn't go down
    - In this case, the `TransactionResubmitter` should continually attempt to resubmit, until the transaction successfully reaches consensus
2. A node crashes during the keying process, either not having created a TssMessage at all, or having submitted a TssMessage that ended up going stale
    - In this case, the node would behave the same way it would any other time it comes online during a keying process. The node would start, observe that the state doesn't contain the requisite self TssMessages, and then generate the messages.

> #### TSS Message Creator

Author: I've updated the proposal to extend the `Transaction Resubmitter` to handle the new `TssMessageTransaction` and `TssVoteTransaction`

The TSS message creator is responsible for generating a node’s TSSMessages. This runs as its own asynchronous thread
since this may be a computationally expensive operation.

Internal Elements:

1. TSS Message Manager
2. active roster field
3. candidate roster field

Inputs:

1. Active Roster (Constructor)
2. Candidate Roster (Wire)
3. Self TSS Message (Wire)
4. Voting Closed Notification (Wire)

Input Invariants:

1. Self TSS Messages must be received after the candidate roster is set.
2. The candidate roster is not set if the voting is already closed.

`On Active Roster`:

1. Set this roster as the active roster.
    1. If the candidate roster is set and the candidate roster is not the active roster, then (re)start the TSS Message
       Manager with the active roster and candidate roster.
    2. If the candidate roster is set and the candidate roster is the active roster, then clear the candidate roster,

>        clear the TTS Message List, and stop the TSS Message Manager

Author: I couldn't find a way to edit your diagram and it was out of date.   
* We were no longer storing anything on disk, bit vector voting replaced the disk.  
* We are not doing state signing through TSS.  
* Your diagram also does not have active or candidate rosters on wires.  

Initially I had a `TssSigningManager` with a generic `ledgerSign(byte[] data)` api for the app to use to generate ledger signatures.  This component replaced the `TssKeyManager` in your diagram.    `TssMessages` were input  to the `TssSigningManager` and nothing else had to get access to the shares from the key material.     The `TssSigningManager` was moved to the `TSS-Block-Signing proposal`. 

That leaves a blank spot where the `TssKeyManager` lives in the earlier diagram. 

Having the active roster on the input wire instead of in the constructor means knowing the wrapping data structure for performing a live roster change.  That would be pulling too much of DAB phase 3 into this effort.   Agreed, doing TSS now means the technical debt for DAB phase 3 increases.   This isn't public API or protobuf, so the platform team has the freedom to evolve the design internally.   DAB phase 3 has to be replanned and go through these platform proposals, anyway.

>        clear the TTS Message List, and stop the TSS Message Manager

Author: I think I see the problem you're pointing at.  I will sleep on it and probably re-add the `TssKeyManager` back in.

The TSS effort has been broken down into 5 separate proposals: TSS-Library, TSS-Roster, TSS-Ledger-ID,
TSS-Block-Signing, and TSS-Ledger-ID-Updates.

1. The `TSS-Library` proposal contains the cryptographic primitives and algorithms needed to implement TSS.
2. The `TSS-Roster` proposal introduces the data structure of a consensus `Roster` to replace the platform's concept of
   an `AddressBook` and modifies the life-cycle for when the platform receives new consensus rosters.
3. This proposal (`TSS-Ledger-ID`) depends on the first two proposals and is for the integration of a threshold
   signature scheme into the consensus node, giving the network a ledger id that can verify ledger signatures.
4. The `TSS-Block-Signing` proposal is everything needed to support the signing of blocks.
5. The `TSS-Ledger-ID-Updates` proposal covers the process of resetting and transplanting ledger ids between networks.

This proposal, `TSS-Ledger-ID`, covers changes to the following elements:

- The process of generating the ledger key pair for new networks and existing networks.
- The process of transferring the ability of the ledger to sign a message from one set of consensus nodes to another.

> - The new state data structures needed to store TSS Key material and the ledger id.

Author: https://crypto.stackexchange.com/questions/80540/meaning-of-the-term-key-material

The term `key material` is pretty standard to refer to the critical bytes.   I'm not sure how I would define it apart from the circular "material used in the keys".

share's private key. The collection of `TssMessages` generated from nodes in the previous consensus roster forms the
`key material` for the new consensus roster.

To bootstrap a network and generate the ledger private and public keys, each node creates a random share for
themselves and generates a `TssMessage` containing `shares of shares` for the total number of shares needed in the
consensus roster. The use of random shares at the outset creates a random ledger private key that nobody knows.

In the context of the consensus nodes using the TSS library, the term `share index` refers to the index of the share as
it is returned in the list of public shares from the tss library. The first share in the list has share index `0`. If
there are 10 shares total, the last share index is `9`. The shares are assigned to nodes in the order of NodeIds. If
Node 0 has 3 shares, then it is given share with index `0`, `1`, and `2`. If Node 1 has 2 shares, then it is given
share indexes `3` and `4`, and so on. The `TssMessages` are similarly ordered. TssMessage `0` is the message generated
for share index `0`.

> ![TSS re-keying next consensus roster](./Groth21-re-keying-shares-of-shares.drawio.svg)

Author: updating the diagram to start from 0 index.

---

## Changes

The changes are presented in the following order:

1. Public API
2. Core Behaviors
3. Component Architecture
4. Configuration
5. Metrics
6. Performance

### Public API

The public API changes consist of the following:

- System Transactions
- State Data Structures

#### System Transactions

The following are new system transactions needed to key rosters and generate ledger signatures:

1. `TssMessageTransaction` - Used to send a TssMessage to the network for a candidate roster.
2. `TssVoteTransaction` - Used to vote on the validity of TssMessages for a candidate roster.

##### TssMessage System Transaction

```protobuf
/**
 * The TssMessageTransaction is used to send a TssMessage to the network for a candidate roster.
 */
message TssMessageTransaction {

  /**
   * The node id is the id of the node that generated the TssMessage.
   */
  uint64 node_id = 1;

  /**
   * The source roster hash is the hash of the roster containing the node generating the TssMessage.
   */
  bytes source_roster_hash = 2;

  /**
   * The target roster hash is the hash of the roster that the TssMessage is for.
   */

>   bytes target_roster_hash = 3;

Author: I would agree, except that if we have multiple rosters in the state, then we will have multiple sets of `TssMessages` and `TssVotes`.   The `previous` roster is going to have TSS key material targeting the `active` roster.  The `active` roster is going to have TSS key material targeting the `candidate` roster.   I chose the names for these fields to explicitly avoid the confusion that the `previous` roster could be creating key material for the `candidate` roster.

>   bytes target_roster_hash = 3;

Reviewer 4: Got it. Thanks for the clarification. This makes sense.

   * then the TssMessage was invalid or there was no TssMessageTransaction with a sequence number corresponding to
   * the bit index.
   */
  bytes tss_vote = 5;

  /**
   * The signature is produced by the node signing the tuple (source_roster_hash, target_roster_hash, ledger_id,
   * node_signature, tss_vote) using its private `tssEncryptionKey`.  The signature is verified by other nodes using
   * the public key of the `tssEncryptionKey` of the node sending this transaction.
   */
  bytes signature = 6;
}
```

#### State Datastructures

The state needs to store the relevant ledger id and TSS Data (key material and votes).

##### Ledger Id Queue

The `ledgerId` is the public ledger key able to verify ledger signatures. It is used by the platform and other
entities outside the consensus node. This value should not change during normal address book changes and its value does
not change unless the network goes through another TSS bootstrap process. When the value is changes, to transfer trust,
the old ledger private key should sign the new ledger id. This signature should be stored along with the round

> value for when the new ledger id becomes active. Triples of ledger id, signature, and round are stored in a queue in

Author: I'm changing it to list and updating the description.

> value for when the new ledger id becomes active. Triples of ledger id, signature, and round are stored in a queue in

Author: Each time the ledger id changes is a critical event.  Ideally it will happen only a couple times and due to underlying rotation of technology.   I get your argument, but given it is low quantity of data that rarely changes and is foundational to our ability to trust, it makes sense to me to model it in the state.   But I will ask for specific review from Leemon and Jasper

> value for when the new ledger id becomes active. Triples of ledger id, signature, and round are stored in a queue in

Author: the size of the collection is potentially infinite.  But practically it shouldn't reach a size of 10 in my life time.  I would hope it doesn't reach a size of 5 during my employment. :-).   Maybe 3. 
1 - initial assignment
2 - possible hinTS like replacement
3 - post quantum solution.

> value for when the new ledger id becomes active. Triples of ledger id, signature, and round are stored in a queue in

Reviewer 4: Makes sense. Thanks for the additional info.

   * ledger id with the node's RSA private key.
   */
  map<uint64, bytes> node_signatures = 4;
}
```

##### TSS Data Maps

There are two maps of tss related data stored in the state through the public state API.

1. `TssMessageMap` - A map of TssMessageTransactions that have come to consensus for a roster.
2. `TssVoteMap` - A map of TssVoteTransactions that have come to consensus for a roster.

Keys in the `TssMessageMap` have the following structure:

```protobuf
/**
  * A key for use in the TssDataMaps.
  */
message TssMessageMapKey {

  /**
   * The roster hash is the hash of the target roster that the value in the tss data map is related to.
   */
  bytes roster_hash = 1;

  /**
   * The sequence number is the order in which the mapped value came to consensus for the given roster hash.
   */
  uint64 sequence_number = 2;
}
```

The values in the `TssMessageMap` are of type `TssMessageTransaction` where the `target_roster_hash` in the value is
the `roster_hash` in the key.

Keys in the `TssVoteMap` have the following structure:

```protobuf
/**
  * A key for use in the TssDataMaps.
  */

> message TssMessageMapKey {

Author: Good catch, updating comment as well.

must contribute yes votes that have the same vote structure for the candidate roster to be adopted. This ensures
that at least 1 honest node has voted yes.

Lifecycle Invariants

1. Inserts should only be made for candidate rosters that are going through the keying process.
2. When a roster is no longer stored in the state, the corresponding key material and votes should be removed.
3. Every roster that has become active after the TSS bootstrap process must have sufficient key material to be
   able to recover the ledger id.

### Core Behaviors

The new behavior is related to the bootstrap process of creating the ledger id and transferring the ability to sign
messages from one roster to the next roster

#### Startup for New Networks

At the start of a new network there will be a new pre-genesis phase to generate the key material for the genesis
roster and then restart the network from round 0 with the new key material and ledger id.

The following startup sequence on new networks is modified from existing practices.

1. The app reads the genesis address book and cryptography from disk.

> 2. The app hands a genesis state, genesis roster, and private keys to the platform.

Author: I've made the state optional.  There's a decision tree that can be used to trigger a network transplant, moving state from one network to another.  Providing a separate genesis roster for use to override the roster in the state (if it exists), allows us to be responsible for the invariants that are maintained in the data structures.  It allows us to do any book keeping at the platform level.

> 2. The app hands a genesis state, genesis roster, and private keys to the platform.

Reviewer 4: Ah, I see. So the idea is to encapsulate the active roster (or roster in general) in the state and let the platform be its sole owner/maintainer, while the app would only ever use an API (either a runtime API to set a candidate roster, or the startup interface to set/override the active roster). Okay, that makes sense I suppose.

3. The platform validates that its private `tssEncryptionKey` matches its public `tssEncryptionKey` in the genesis
   roster. If there is a mismatch, a critical error is logged and the node shuts down.
4. The platform copies the genesis state and starts gossiping with peers in a pre-genesis mode with the following
   behavior:
   1. User transactions are not accepted from the app and events containing user transactions are ignored.
   2. A node in pre-genesis mode can only gossip with other peers in pre-genesis mode.
   3. If a pre-genesis node encounters a peer that is post-genesis, the post-genesis node sents the address book

>       and key material and the pre-genesis node restarts itself after successfully validating the key material.

Author: How would the malicious node construct a validatable key material? 
1. The pre-genesis node still has an un-keyed roster, but each entry has a `tssEncryptionKey`. 
2. The pre-genesis node will validate each `TssMessageTransaction` came from the node claimed and that the `TssMessage` inside it is valid with respect to the node's encryption key.  

If the malicious node can construct validatable key material that is poisoned, then the whole TSS algorithm is compromised.

>       and key material and the pre-genesis node restarts itself after successfully validating the key material.

Reviewer 4: I see. I guess I missed the validation part. If the validation is taking place here on the pre-genesis node, then there's no problems.

      connecting to other peers.
   5. If all peers are in post-genesis and no peer can provide validatable key material, the node logs a critical
      error and shuts itself down.
   6. Active nodes in pre-genesis mode will initiate the tss-bootstrap process by generating a random share for
      themselves and create a TssMessage with shares of shares for the total number of shares needed in the
      genesis roster.
   7. When a pre-genesis node has enough key-material to generate the ledger id, the node votes yes that it is ready to
      adopt the key material.
   8. When a node detects that a threshold number of pre-genesis nodes on the network are ready to adopt the key
      material, the node adds the key material and ledger id to a copy of the genesis state and restarts the platform.
5. Once a node has restarted with the key material and ledger id, the node will start accepting user transactions and
   building a new hashgraph from round 0. It is now in post-genesis mode.
6. If any pre-genesis nodes connects to the post-genesis node, the post-genesis node provides the pre-genesis node a

>    copy of the tss key-material and ledger id. This is the only communication supported with pre-genesis nodes.

Author: Same level of exposure / risk to a malicious peer in Gossip.    The good know has to keep track of bad behavior of peers.

>    copy of the tss key-material and ledger id. This is the only communication supported with pre-genesis nodes.

Reviewer 4: Could we mention this in the design proposal explicitly so that this protection mechanism actually gets implemented?

>    copy of the tss key-material and ledger id. This is the only communication supported with pre-genesis nodes.

Author: I've updated the text to talk about how to mitigate a potential DDOS through rate limiting the provision of key material.

>    copy of the tss key-material and ledger id. This is the only communication supported with pre-genesis nodes.

Reviewer 4: Looks good to me now. Thank you!

#### Startup for Existing Networks

##### The Release Containing the `tssEncryptionKey`

This release must occur with or after the complete deployment of the TSS-Roster proposal.

This release contains all the state data structures needed to store the public `tssEncryptionKey` in the state and all
code needed to support storing and retrieving the private `tssEncryptionKey` on disk and managing the `tssEncryptionKey`
life cycle, including key rotation.

The release supporting the addition of the `tssEncryptionKey` to the roster also provides modified HAPI
transactions for updating the address book with a node's `tssEncryptionKey`. Until the next software upgrade, only
the candidate roster will have the `tssEncryptionKey` possibly set in roster entries.

The following startup sequence change is included in this software release:

1. The app reads the state and cryptography from disk (including support for reading the private `tssEncryptionKey`)
2. The app hands the state and private keys to the platform.
3. If a software upgrade is detected, if the candidate roster is set, it is adopted immediately. If there is no

>    candidate roster, the existing active roster in the state remains the active roster.

Author: I've gutted the enumeration and replaced it with just the step that is different.

4. If a new active roster is set and the node's entry in the new active roster contains a public `tssEncryptionKey`,
   it is validated against the loaded private `tssEncryptionKey`. If there is a mismatch, or the private key was
   not loaded, a critical error is logged and the node shuts down.

> 5. The rest of the startup sequence is consistent with the TSS-Roster proposal.

Author: I assume this question is rhetorical. :-)

> 5. The rest of the startup sequence is consistent with the TSS-Roster proposal.

Reviewer 4: Yup :)

##### The Release Containing the TSS Bootstrap Process

This release must be at least 1 release after the `tssEncryptionKey` release.

The following startup sequence occurs: (This sequence should work for this release and all subsequent releases
unless the startup sequence is modified by subsequent releases.)

1. The app reads the state and cryptography from disk (including support for reading the private `tssEncryptionKey`)
2. The app hands the state and private keys to the platform.
3. The platform validates that its private `tssEncryptionKey`  matches its public `tssEncryptionKey` in the active
   roster. If there is a mismatch, a critical error is logged and the node shuts down.
4. If a software upgrade is detected,
   1. If the existing active roster and candidate roster do not have key material, adopt the candidate roster
      immediately.
   2. If the candidate roster exists, has key material, and the number of yes votes passes the threshold for

>       adoption, then the candidate roster is adopted.

Reviewer 4: Something doesn't look right here for as long as we have the first option. Suppose the app installs a candidate roster with an intention to bootstrap TSS by collecting the key material, but the network happens to go through a software upgrade before the collection could start. The first option would adopt the candidate roster immediately while this isn't what the app intended to do.

Author: The very first time that the program starts with the new code, the candidate roster will not have any key material.  The prior software version didn't have the code to generate the key material. 

If this new software deployment can't generate any key material before the software upgrade occurs, either we did not do enough testing, or something went really wrong with TSS, but we shouldn't prevent the adoption of the roster.   We should continue the same behavior as the previous software deployment, which is to adopt the roster on software upgrade.

Reviewer 4: I see arguments from both the sides, but I still don't think it is right for a TSS-capable version of the software to adopt a candidate roster that doesn't have TSS material collected as this may contradict the intention of the system owners who installed the candidate roster in the first place before upgrading to that version of the software.

Could we get a clarification from product managers and/or engineering leadership as to what the right solution here is?

Author: I've updated with clarification from leadership that until we key the network with a ledger id for the first time, the previous semantics stay the same, to always adopt the candidate roster on software upgrade.

Reviewer 4: Thanks! With the clarifications that we've received and the updated wording, this part now looks fine.

#### New Address Book Life-Cycle

Each day, on the first transaction after midnight, after the staking information has been updated by the app, it will
generate a new roster and call a public API on `TSS Base Service`, which will then use this as the new candidate
roster, and proceed with generation of TSS key material. This new roster, once keyed, is not used, unless there is
a network upgrade.

On the day the network is upgraded, the candidate roster will have started the keying process at midnight (UTC-0).
The upgrade is usually performed during business hours, after 8:00 am (UTC-5). This is a 13-hour window for the
key material to be computed. It is expected that this is sufficient time to compute the key material, but under
certain conditions there is a possibility that the key material will not be computed in time. If the key material
is not computed in time, the candidate roster will not be adopted and the network will continue to use the previous

> active roster.

Reviewer 4: The wording at lines 179-181 slightly contradicts the more elaborate description of the changes to the roster life cycle, specifically the lines 716 and onwards below. I suggest to keep only a single copy of the life-cycle description in the document to ensure its consistency. Otherwise, please add some conditionals here to indicate when the lines 179-181 are actually true and when they aren't.

Author: I don't perceive the contradiction myself.  I am tweaking the wording here, hopefully fixing the perceived contradiction.   The different location of description is intended for different audiences.

| TSS-009     | Yes   | Yes     |
| TSS-010     | Yes   | No      |

###### hinTS

The hinTS algorithm is a threshold signature scheme that is able to measure double precision distributions of weight
across nodes. The complicating factor with hinTS is that during an address book change over, a recursive proof needs
to be constructed to prove that the new roster is a descendent of the original genesis roster. Validation of this
recursive proof proved too expensive for EVM smart contracts.

> #### TSS Genesis Process

Author: changed to bootstrap.

  reconstruction of the ledger id.
* If a bit is set to 0, then the TssMessage for the corresponding ShareId was either invalid, was not received, or
  was not used in the reconstruction of the ledger id.

Lifecycle Invariants

1. Inserts should only be made for candidate rosters that are going through the keying process.
2. When a roster is no longer stored in the state, the corresponding key material should be removed.
3. Every roster that has become active after the TSS Genesis process must have sufficient key material to be
   able to recover the ledger id.

#### New Wiring Components

The following are new components in the system:

1. TSS State Manager (Not Wired)
2. TSS Message Creator (Wired)
3. TSS Message Validator (Wired)
4. TSS Key Manager (Wired)

##### TSS State Manager

The TSS state manager is executed on the transaction handling thread and is capable of reading and writing the state
during round handling. The logic will be encapsulated in a class with a well-defined API, but this will not be a fully
fledged wiring component outside the consensus round handler.

> Responsibilities:

Reviewer 4: There seems to be a lot. While I understand that all of the below needs to happen, I think we might want to think about splitting the responsibilities across several components instead of having a single, very complex "TSS State Manager".

Author: It's not really a component in the sense of having its own internal state in memory and operating on its own thread scheduler.  This is more like a collection of methods that get invoked when handling the TSS related system transactions.

1. Handle `TssMessage` system transactions
    - handled in consensus order
    - insert into the TSS data map if it is legal to do so
        - don’t insert multiple messages for the same node
        - don’t insert any messages if voting window has closed
    - if inserted into the TSS data map, ensure that the message is forwarded to the TSS Message Validator
2. Handle `TssVote` system transactions
    - handled in consensus order
    - insert into TSS data map if it is legal to do so
        - don’t insert multiple votes for the same node
        - don’t insert once voting is closed
    - after insertion, re-tally votes and decide if voting is now closed
    - if voting is closed as the result of a new vote,
        - if the “no” votes win, then the candidate roster will never be adopted
        - if the “yes” votes win, the candidate roster is now officially confirmed, and will be adopted at the next
          upgrade boundary
3. Detect when a new candidate roster is set.

>     - update the pending roster hash in the platform state

Reviewer 4: Per the current `TSS-Roster` proposal, all rosters (active, candidate, previous, etc.) will be stored in a map in the state, and the app would indicate that there's a new candidate roster by setting a candidate roster hash in the state somewhere (TBD where.) But the point is that this particular action described in this line would've already been performed by the app. The "TSS State Manager" would only need to detect that this hash has been written to this place and the proceed with informing other components as described just below.

Author: removed the line that is the responsibility of the TSS-Roster effort.

  shares.
- So both theorems are proved.

###### Threshold for Votes to Adopt a Candidate Roster

> The sum of the consensus weight of all the nodes that have voted yes to adopt the candidate roster must greater than or
> equal to 1/3 of the total consensus weight to ensure that at least one honest node has validated the TSS key
> material and voted yes.
> 
> Since all votes are tabulated after reaching consensus and advancing consensus requires active nodes totalling 2/3
> consensus weight, the threshold of 1/2 consensus weight is safe and achievable.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The sum of the consensus weight of all the nodes that have voted yes to adopt the candidate roster must be greater than or
equal to 1/3 of the total consensus weight to ensure that at least one honest node has validated the TSS key
material and voted yes.

Since all votes are tabulated after reaching consensus and advancing consensus requires active nodes totalling 2/3
consensus weight, the threshold of 1/2 consensus weight is safe and achievable.
```

In addition to the `be`, at line 303 you're talking `1/3`, and at line 307 you're talking `1/2`, in both the cases referring to it as a "consensus weight threshold". So I'm unsure if it's 1/3 or 1/2. And if it is 1/3, then I'm still unsure if it's 1/3 or (1/3+1), because 1/3 doesn't really seem sufficient to me.

   - Send the `TssVoteTransaction` to the `TssCryptographyManager`.
4. Method `setCandidateRoster(Roster candidateRoster)`:
   - If there already exists a candidate roster in the state, erase it and its related data from the `TssMessageMap`
     and `TssVoteMap`.
   - Set the new candidate roster in the state.
   - Send the candidate roster to the `TssCryptographyManager`.

#### `TssCryptographyManager`

The TSS manager executes on a separate thread and is responsible for all asynchronous cryptography computations that
cannot be performed on the transaction handling thread. The computational responsibilities include:

- Keying the candidate roster.
- Submitting TssMessageTransactions to the transaction pool.
- Submitting TssVoteTransactions to the transaction pool.
- Computing public and private keys of shares when there is enough key material generated for the candidate roster.
- Computing the ledger id.
- Submitting the candidate roster to the platform for adoption when the candidate roster has enough key material to
  generate the ledger id.

##### `TssCryptographyManager` Details

Internal Elements:

> 1. NodeId (constructor)

Reviewer 4: This and the below seem to be extremely low-level details of the implementation. While I'm curious to learn about them, I'm unsure if this belongs to the design doc.

Author: When everything was separated into multiple components, it was essential to see how the components were communicating and interacting.  Now that everything is in a single component, I can agree that the details may be unnecessary at this point.  But I wasn't able to evaluate the multi-component design without the details of who communicates to who and who needs what in order to perform their function.  

I don't want to delete it.   I think its still relevant details to see what is necessary as input and what is generated as output when.

The TSS Base Service will be broken out into one interface and two components.

1. `TssBaseService` - the interface that defines the public API for the TSS Base Service.
2. `TssStateManager` - executes on the transaction handling thread and updates state.
3. `TssCryptographyManager` - executes on a separate thread and is responsible for cryptographic operations.
4. Transaction Resubmission

![TSS Platform Wiring](./TSS-Wiring-Diagram.drawio.svg)

> #### TssBAseService

Reviewer 4: Nit: `s/BA/Ba/`

Author: fixing it, thanks for the catch!
